Introduction
When my mother was on her commute home, she passed by a restaurant where a woman and (presumably) her daughter were sitting at a table. What my mother took notice of was the way that the woman was moving her head around, observing the environment around her, while her daughter was sitting completely still, back straight, while staring down at an iPad. Here, an intriguing reversal of roles has occurred, where usually the child is inquisitive and curious while the parent is desensitised to their environment and their fascination with it is numbed. This story, and the way my mother thought of it as something significant, is indicative of current concerns about the abundant and increasingly ubiquitous usage of digital media. Not only in the way that the youngest generations are being raised with a completely new type of media which remains to be fully explored and understood, but also in the way that generational gaps are enhanced because of this. As such, as much are harmful facets within digital media, there are also harmful projections. 
	In order to explore the potential harm of ubiquitous digital media, I will refer to Tom Gunning (2004) and how he explores our fascination with photography which is reliant not on their indexicality, but instead on their ability to present various realities which the viewer inhabits. This inhabiting is then expanded upon through the work of Ingrid Richardson (2010), who writes about how our bodies merge with technologies in different ways, and through this process extend reality. As reality extends, and as the body-tool forms, awareness can be stored within technology, which further leads to a further merging. At the point that digital media begins to impact not only the public sphere, but also governance and the spread of misinformation, that calls for digital literacy begin to form. In order to examine the harmful aspects of the melding of realities, Gianfranco Polizzi (2023) uses utopian/dystopian imaginaries to ensure digital literacy can both emphasise the positives of the internet, but also contend with the negatives. Laura Teichert (2020) similarly explores digital literacy, and places it in the context of previous literacies, while also portraying the struggles of raising a child according to The American Academy of Pediatrics guidelines about screen time. 
Gunning on indexicality
When considering the relation of reality and the physical image, Gunning explores the supposed difference of digital and analogue photography through the concept of indexicality. In order to contextualise the use of the concept of indexicality, he recognises the way that new media, through the “ignoring of the true complexities that photography, cinema and other visual media capturing light and motion presented, simply displacing their promises and disappointments unto a yet-to-be-achieved digital media utopia” (Gunning 2004, 39). In this understanding though, he does not define either process as more indexical, he instead posits that “both photographic chemicals and the digital data must be subjected to elaborate procedures before a picture will result” (40), in this sense adding complexity to the claim that analogue photographs are inherently indexical. 
	The idea that analogue photographic processes are inherently more rooted in indexicality comes from the abstraction of these processes. The common claim is that “our belief in photographic images depends on our knowledge of how they are made, on being aware of the fact that light bounced from the object has a causal role in the creation of the image” (Gunning 2004, 45). The indexicality of analogue photography is inherent to the medium, as there is a physical relation between the capturing of light, hitting chemicals and producing a replica. 
	 And yet, there is a complication to this inherent indexicality when considering the various methods through which a photograph's relation to the physical is altered, like through “retouching, use of filters or lenses, selection of angle of photography” (41) to name a few. And so, Gunning posits that “traditional photography, therefore, also possesses processes that can attenuate, ignore, or even undo the indexical” (41). In this way, by more closely examining the process in which photographs have been created throughout history, their claim to truth varied, and allows for the examination of digital photographs in more similar terms. 
Digital photography, though linked to the amputation of indexicality in its simplicity of process, functions in a similar fashion. The digital process is rooted not in the physical light, but in the “rows of numerical data produced by a digital camera” (40). There is a similarity in the process, however, in the sequence of events for an image to be created. An argument for the difference between analogue and digital processes lies in the ability of the digital altering of photos. As discussed, these differences are categorised more in the non-understanding of physical processes. As such, “the difference between digital and film-based photography cannot be described as absolute” (2004, 41). Considering this, the indexicality attributed to photography has always been one which can be redefined. When digital photography is understood to be more complex than analogue photographs, in their ability to distort their indexicality, the malleability of analogue photographs is being obscured.
It is in regards to this similarity in the processes, where indexicality has always been transient, where Gunning introduces delight as another way of understanding photographs. The accuracy of the presentation of the world has always been up for questioning and contributes to this delight, as the “playful push-pull between its associations with accuracy” and “its obvious distortion” (45). Similarly, when “confronted with a photograph”, the judgement is not based on the “knowledge of its means of production”, instead it is inhabited and recognised “even if the recognition involves the playful discovery that this world is impossible” (46). In this way, the value of the truth claim of an image is not so much the belief it produces, as much as it is how it reveals the pervasive tensions between realities. As such, Gunning posits that indexicality held as an “absolute barrier” is perhaps not as necessary as “accenting [the] visual acuity and excessive quality” of photography which has fallen out of recent discussion (47). The question of indexicality remains a facet of photography, however, commentary should delve deeper into the various processes involved in creating photographs, digital or analogue.
Gunning establishes a difference between analogue and digital photographs in common discourse, where one is held to be more indexical than the other. However, this distinction is made complicated when delving into the various processes involved in creating these photographs, and understanding that analogue photos have been toying with indexicality, albeit in different and slower fashions than digital photography. As such, Gunning presents an alternate view on the ability of photography to “delight” the viewer, in the various realities presented by them, which occurs regardless of their technical relations to physicality. In this way, the barriers between analogue and digital processes are diminished. 
Richardson and the metaphor of the body-tool
As technology advances, the relationship we form with technology changes. Gunning recognises this, advancing through photographical relations to reality, how the truth claim of photographs is “the product of social discourses as well as the indexical quality of the camera” (2004, 48). To look at a photograph and to view the realities they present has more to do with the delight felt by them, rather than their claim to truth. Richardson (2010) approaches this idea of various realities by using various metaphors to emphasize how technologies extend our bodily boundaries (1), and as such I will argue that these various realities, first invoked through the non-indexicality of photography, will begin to merge as technologies begin to affect our bodies and environments.   
	By referring to earlier theorisations about televisions, Richardson (2010) contextualises our contemporary engagement with screens, and documents the shifts in our bodily behaviours. Looking at the “complex ways we ‘turn’ to them with varying degrees of attention and distraction”, she explores how “our engagement with screens and interfaces is medium specific” (2010, 1). Cinema and television are experienced in different ways when all other disruptions are eliminated in one, and disruptions are formed around the other, defining this turning to the screen as a corporeal schematic (3, 4). However, “the way in which we perceive and navigate screens [...] has seen a number of adjustments” (5) with the adoption of mobile screens, where the “facial and sensory dedication we apply to media screens varies according to the mode of technosomatic involvement demanded by both the interface and the cultural, experiential and material contextures” (ibid.). This change in bodily behaviour in reference to the tool (screen), the embodiment of the screen, is what Richardson dubs the “body-tool” (ibid.).  
	It is through mapping the changes in the embodiment of technology that Richardson explains how their extensions of the body impact our perceptions of reality. For example, “when watching television we ‘lean back’ in contrast to the ‘lean forward’ body posture demanded of interactive screen media” (3), and so the corporeality demanded of different technologies is illuminated. These processes are subconscious, and occur without reflection on the technology, similar to the way that the “knowledge of how [photographs] are made” (Gunning 2004, 45) has been abstracted, as the viewing of a photography relates not to the light and chemicals or number sequence which created it, instead it functions as a view into an alternate reality. In terms of realities and technology, Richardson (2010) argues that “it is only which can be interpreted in terms of our complex body-model” which can be “realised or made real” (4), where “​​very merger with technology invokes certain kinds of being-in-the-world” (1), explaining that the merging of our tools into our bodies extends our realities. The realities created in photographs begin to bleed into our reality, and the distinctions between the reality of images and our lived reality begin to blur. 
As such, in order to further understand this merger of realities, Richardson’s metaphors of embodiment within screens and windows is shown to be reminiscent of Gunning’s discussion of the indexicality and the smaller parts which it refers to. Richardson (2010) explains how “the frames of window and screen are similarly rectangular, they can be similarly interpreted as membranes between ‘inside’ and ‘outside,’ and what one sees through the frame is a portion of the world in space and time” (5). In this metaphor, media are reduced to a similar physicality as photography, a rectangular shape depicting something in a different space and time, where Gunning (2004) argues that our fascination in photographs lies in “the sense of a nearly inexhaustible visual richness to the photograph, combined with a sense of the photograph’s lack of selection”, where “the photograph appears to share the complexity of its subject, to capture all its details, even those we might not ordinarily notice” (47). As such, the photographs meticulously captures one moment in “time and space”, and offers the viewer a window into it, a look from the outside to the inside. And this does not have to be a reality which pertains to truth, despite our obsession with it. As I have mentioned, Gunning argues that when he is “confronted with a photograph, [he does not] so much make a judgement based on [his] knowledge of its means of production as [he] immediately inhabit its image and [recognizes] it” (46). 
Richardson (2010) explains how “linear perspectival vision [...] can be characterised by the way visibility and light have come to stand for truth, belief and knowability” (6), denoting distance between the observer and the technology. However, by exploring the changes of the body in reference to the changes in screen, this metaphor does not encapsulate the “micro-practices surrounding our experience of contemporary screen” (10), and does not effectively capture how our embodiment of the mobile screen is “distracted, discontinuous, motile, peripatetic and tangible” (ibid.). As such, both authors emphasise the embodiment of media as key to understanding how they affect our behaviour. In order to understand the worry about mobile screens, this inhabiting of the screen and its extension of us must be situated, and differentiations must be made between the bodily relation with different technologies.  

The problem that both Tom Gunning and Ingrid Richardson address is the impact of digital media on our perception of reality and the merging of human bodies with technology. They explore how technology, specifically photography and screens, alters our understanding of the world and our relationship with it.

Tom Gunning delves into the concept of indexicality in photography, challenging the notion that analogue photographs are inherently more truthful or rooted in reality than digital photographs. He argues that both analogue and digital photography involve complex processes that can distort reality. Gunning emphasises the role of delight and fascination with photographs, not because they are accurate representations of reality, but because they present various, sometimes fantastical, realities for the viewer to inhabit. This underscores the idea that our interaction with photographs is not solely about their truthfulness but about the multiple realities they can represent and the emotional and cognitive engagement they provoke.

Ingrid Richardson, on the other hand, focuses on how our bodies interact with and are extended by various technologies, particularly screens. She uses the metaphor of the "body-tool" to explain how different types of screens (e.g., television vs. mobile screens) require different bodily postures and levels of engagement. Richardson argues that these technological extensions of our bodies change our perceptions and experiences of reality. She highlights how our engagement with screens creates new forms of being-in-the-world, where the boundaries between the physical and digital worlds blur, leading to a merging of realities.

Both authors emphasize the transformation of reality through technological mediation. Gunning discusses this in the context of photography's evolving indexicality and the delight in its various realities. Richardson extends this by exploring how the physical embodiment of technology alters our interaction with and perception of reality, leading to new, hybrid forms of existence where digital and physical experiences converge.
Technology as gateways into utopia/dystopia
There is a potential inverse relationship between the visibility of an image, and the adaptation of the body-tool. As I mentioned earlier, despite the higher efficiency of digital alteration, the difference between digital and analogue photography is not all encompassing (Gunning 2004, 41). These similarities may be found in the fact that both processes return an object, based on an object, with a similar need for interpretation and embodiment. In this way, photography can be understood as the precursor to cinema which at one point in time dilated “our corporeal being accordingly”, through which we could learn a “new range of collective bodily skills, spatial perceptions, postures and habits” (Richardson 2010, 9). Think of the introduced need to capture a moment which one is experiencing, in order to save it for the future. This is one which has always existed, but has become more accessible as technology advances. Sketching accurately is more difficult than taking a photo, which in turn is more difficult than filming. However, in each stage, less awareness of the situation at hand is needed, where the technology takes on more of that responsibility. I argue then that there is a balance within actions, and so this awareness transfers to the media object created. In order to view the media object, a more intense bodily relation is required. 
	As technology advances, they become ubiquitous, yet also exclusionary. A problem both authors have identified is the rigidity through which we understand media processes, either with the fixed definition of indexicality, or through the fixed understanding of media through the metaphor of the screen or window, where the observer is outside watching what is inside. By examining current technological trends, “we can more effectively interpret the way mobile devices in particular modify our communicative and playful practices” (Richardson 2010, 10), and in this way gain an understanding into how they will impact future generations. 
	Polizzi (2023) argues that the realities of digital media can be examined as utopias/dystopias, where “no binary opposition should be asserted between the two, not least because of the role of dystopianism in shaping utopia-nism” (1210). Through these imaginaries, he can reflect how “the Internet facilitates, for instance, not just public debate, citizens’ interaction with politicians and activism, but also elitism, misinformation, polarization and surveillance” (1216). In a way, this parallels Gunning’s explanation of the photograph, where photography has the ability to alter its object, despite its apparent claim to truth. It is through a certain imagery literacy that the viewer can unpack the merging of realities. To inhabit the reality of an image is to internalise the message of that reality, which will go uncontested without imagery literacy.
In the same vain, digital media requires a “digital literacy” (1209), which both Polizzi and Teichert (2020) approach through socio-cultural perspectives, in order to emphasise “users’ creative engagement with multimodality” (Polizzi 2023, 1209), as well as to underscore the link of digital literacy with other forms of literacy, and as such, the “the social situations in which individuals come to literacy” can be considered (Teichert 2020, 531). As digital media more easily disseminates recorded awareness for the consumption of viewers, and as our habits begin to form around screens, there is a need for digital literacy
Our habits have started to merge with screens. For example, when Teichert (2020) writes about the difficulty of raising a baby with the restriction of “no screen-time”, she says that in her family, they require digital tools and that “they are embedded in the everyday ways [they] ‘do life’” (544). This is a consequence of the way “transient and non-dedicated attentiveness required by the small screen”, where the user “can ‘switch off’ but ‘not totally’” (Richardson 2010, 10). As such, from infantdom, screens will figure in daily life. By undertaking the utopian/dystopian imaginary of digital media, this can be understood as something which both leads to a high rate of digital literacy in terms of using technology (Teichert 2020, 533), but something which will need “educationalists and policymakers” committing to “promoting digital literacy as a lifelong set of digital skills and knowledge that users should develop from an early age” (Polizzi 2023, 1221). 
The consequence of developing technologies is that alternate realities always seem delightful, as well as exploitable. These realities have become shared, and so the merging of the body and the tool are simultaneously a merging of various realities which bleed into every aspect of our lives. As such, the complexity of our changed habits and relations to each other should be understood to be not necessarily harmful or good. Instead, it is through this embodiment that we can create balanced consumption of digital media.
Conclusion
In conclusion, the pervasive impact of digital media on human perception and interaction with reality, as well as the merging of human bodies with technology, cannot be understated.

Tom Gunning’s exploration of indexicality in photography challenges the notion that analogue photography is inherently more truthful than digital photography. Both mediums involve complex processes that can distort reality. Gunning emphasises that our fascination with photographs stems from their ability to present various realities, not just their truthfulness. This understanding of photography’s role in manipulating reality provides a foundation for examining digital media’s broader impact.

The body-tool metaphor by Ingrid Richarsson further illuminates how technologies, especially screens, extend our bodily boundaries and alter our perceptions of reality. Different screens demand different levels of bodily engagement, creating new forms of existence where the lines between the physical and digital worlds blur. This embodiment of technology changes our interaction with and perception of our environment.

The discussion of utopian and dystopian imaginaries presents a framework for understanding the dual potential of digital media. While digital media facilitates public debate and activism, it also harbours dangers such as misinformation and polarisation. Polizzi argues for the necessity of digital literacy to navigate these positives and negatives effectively. Similarly, Laura Teichert emphasises the importance of digital literacy, placing it within the context of previous literacies and highlighting the challenges of raising children according to screen-time guidelines.

These interconnected concepts illustrate that digital media fundamentally alters human behavior and perception. As technology continues to advance, it becomes crucial to develop new approaches to literacy that allow us to critically engage with digital media. Future research should focus on digital literacy and its application in understanding the embodied use of screens. By doing so, we can better navigate the complex realities created by digital media, balancing its delightful aspects with its potential for harm. The evolving impact of digital media on our lives demands ongoing attention and study in the academic world.
