



EMBODIMENT OF ENTANGLED ARCHIVES THROUGH ILLNESS: OUTLINING THE DIFFERENCE IN PHYSICAL AND EPHEMERAL ARCHIVES CREATED THROUGH INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION, AND REIMAGINING ARCHIVES AS ENTANGLED THROUGH EMBODIMENT IN SJÄLÖ (2020). 












Aino Kallinen, 13936115
Thesis Draft, Media and Culture
meLê Yamomo
04.06.24

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PROLOGUE	1
INTRODUCTION	2
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK	7
Physical and Ephemeral	7
Inclusion/Exclusion	8
Embodiment Reveals Entanglement	9
CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS THE ARCHIVE?	11
What does the physical archive look like?	12
Paranoid preservation	16
CHAPTER 2: WHAT IS EXCLUDED?	19
Soul Island, Seal Island	20
CHAPTER 3: ENTANGLEMENT	21
CONCLUSION	22
BIBLIOGRAPHY	23


PROLOGUE
Summers are glorious where the sun never sets. Bedrock cliffs retain the heat of sunlight, warm throughout the night. Lakes glimmer as oars glide through them, supple splashes wetting smooth hands. Soft, sliced vanilla ice cream from rectangular carton packets. The small yellow car drives along endless roads lined with pine trees and birches. Stopping at the roadside to throw up pink juice. Feeling better afterward. Long grass, bare legs, mosquito bites. Calmed in the cool sea, brackish water neither sweet nor saline. Memories of summer I categorised as homeland when I grew up abroad. Recategorised as respite once I was seven after having lived through a full year of Finnishness, disillusioned with my frozen land and its frozen people. Slashing at roots embedded along the coast, which continue to spread in spite. I used to wonder whether they were invasive, if they belonged somewhere. 


INTRODUCTION
Everything moves, be it the trees in the wind, the tectonic plates under our feet, or the ancient glaciers over what is now known as Finland. They were heavy, kilometresmetres thick as well as large, moving back and forth over mountains, and pushing land under the ocean. Then came the flood, as glaciers melted into rivers, forming stone sculptures and denting land by creating ridges. The glaciers disappear but their pressure echoes, and ground continues to slowly rise, sometimes trapping water in land, sometimes creating peaks within sea. These are the processes which formed the southwestern Finnish archipelago, in the northern Baltic sea, and it is here that Själö (Seili) lies (Stock et. al. 2010). 
It is with the words “In whatever TODOthshja the king gustav adolf TODOhahsh designated the island to be an asylum for leprosy” that Lotta Petronella’s documentary Själö - Island of Souls (2020) begins. Själö in Swedish, or Seili in Finnish, is an island with a longstanding relationship with medicine and science. In accordance with the documentary, as a Finnish Swedish production, and as the documentary is called Själö - Island of Souls, I will be referring to the island by its Swedish name. Additionally, the Finnish name is extrapolated from the Swedish name. The name comes from the words seal (själ in old swedish) and island (ö). This ties into a long history of seal hunting in the Baltic sea, where hunters had to know closely how the seals behaved and where they nested. (Huttunen, n.d.) The name indicates that seals could often be found on the island. Seal hunting, as a tradition, continued in Finland until the 1900s, when seals began to decrease intensely (ibid.). 
It is through ticks that Petronella begins to study the island, its history and its definitions of madness and detention. Similarly, it is through ticks that I find Petronella’s documentary, Själö - Island of Souls (2020), the first product of her island study. Despite the fact that my father grew up in Pargas, a town close to Själö and the municipality within which Själö resides, and despite the fact that Själö has existed in Finnish, especially Finnish-Swedish cultural dialogue, it is only through this documentary that I learn of the existence of the island and its history. 
Quickly after the island became a leprosy asylum, it also began to function as a mental asylum. In the 1800s (source TODO????), leprosy cases had decreased a lot. It was decided that an asylum for men would be built in somewhere, and thus the island become a place for mentally ill, or unfit for society, women to be sent to. This continued until 1962TODO?. Then, two years later the University of Turku started a research institution on the island to study the sea and the life on the island. This continues to this day, though with some mentions of a cut to the budget leading to a potential closure of the research facility. Increasingly, although from the beginning as well, the island is becoming a place to visit. The island now hosts a three day yoga retreat for the low price of 340 €, as well as a hotel, restaurant and tours of the island and its structures (Visit Seili, n.d.). The nature of the archipelago and the island are in themselves interesting, and then the rugged history of the hospital furthers interest. 
The island has held cultural relevance within Finnish discourse, despite my lack of knowledge about it. Zacharias Topelius wrote of Själö in one of his volumes of Finland framstäldt i teckningar (1845–1852date what), mentioning the foreboding feelings of seeing the island. Topelius, like many other men mentioned throughout this work, is attributed with strengthening the Finnish cultural relevance through many means, including writing books about the country (Unesco 2023). In 2017, the archive of his work was officially regarded as a cultural heritage by Unesco (HBL 2017). “Even from Skjälö’s walls”, he writes, “sounds the same ironclad judgement: Those who enter here, leave all your hope behind!” (Topelius 1845). The horror of Själö echoes through words written by its inhabitants and its visitors, and almost two hundred years later, the island continues to be prevalent in the Finnish cultural world. 
Petronella’s documentary is also not the first documentary to tackle the island and its history, specifically focused on the letters by women. Examples are the 2010 album by Jenni Vartiainen titled Seili, and the 2017 novel by Johanna Holmström called Själarnas ö (The souls’ island), which was turned into a play in by the same name, in 2022. Even documentaries focusing on the same subject matter have preceded Petronella’s. In the documentary Kvinnorna på Själö (2008, The Women On Själö), Mikaela Weurlander uses some of the same letters as Petronella in order to depict the women's fate on the island. Weurlander’s documentary is more traditional in its approaches to the subject matter, with sit down interviews and recreations of the historical events. The documentary also heavily sites Jutta Ahlbeck-Rehn, a sociologist who wrote her doctoral thesis on the pathologization of madness and class on Själö, and who I will also be referring to as I untangle the web of inferiority and subjugation of Finnish nationalism. 
In an interview for Contemporary Art Archipelago, Lotta Petronella (Oakes 2023) details her relationship with the archipelago and with Själö. Like me, she has “ known these islands since (sheSHe) was young”,  first superficially by spending her summers there (ibid.). My father grew up in a town not far from Själö. I’ve visited my grandfather who lives there and we’ve sailed through the rocky, sometimes beautiful landscape of the archipelago. It was only after Petronella had moved back to Finland from London after 15 years of living there, that she properly spent time in the archipelago. She started a project Skärikvinnor (2008) in which she followed a few women from the archipelago around, and it is during this process she began to understand her position on the islands. While she lived on the island, she “was neither them nor merely observing them” (Oakes 2023), and she began to reckon with her position as a filmmaker, intermingling questions of belonging for herself with being offered an invitation to be part of a life on the islands. She says that this changed her approach to filmmaking in general. When she was invited to the Själö by a friend working on the island researching ticks, she thought it was “ridiculous” at first, since she’s neither a scientist nor an academic (ibid.). Then their strangeness drew her in, as did the island. 
Through Petronella’s synthesis of the physical archive on the island with her own emotionality and context, she argues for an “invisible archive” which exists within the stories less told. Throughout my research, I have found myself enchanted by the idea of archives, realising the power they hold and the power they represent. By analysing Petronella’s representation of the archive itself through its physicality of shelves filled with documented documents, its position on the island rich with biodiversity, then contrasting this with the poetry embedded throughout aiming to give voice to this invisible archive, I explore how the physical and ephemeral act upon one another. I link this to the role the Swedish monarchy has played in constructing Finnishness, specifically linked to Själö asylum through its founding origins, and looking at the role of religion within the monarchy (maybe TODOmauybe). Then, trying to burrow deeper into the value which the letters hold in the understanding of archives as all around us, language takes centre stage. Swedish as a central facet in the creation of a cohesive Finnish language, both in garnering respect for it, and in the way it was formed, through bilingual scholars like Agricola and Lönnrot. Here, I look at the reason for the poem throughout the documentary being in finnish. I look for the omissions in meaning making, at all that is discarded as unimportant, the dynamics of inclusion and exclusion. 
In the final chapter, entanglements reveal themselves. They have always existed, despite our attempts to sever them. Here, the researchers come into clear focus, as a representation of the current knowledge making, within which the echoes of past systems of knowledge continue to bounce. Petronella writes that she wanted to compare the research on ticks with the research on patients. I see this connection, and examine how our current scientific methods, through exclusion, exist in a state outside of nature. We can study nature, we can glean it for information and resources. And yet, this perception is crumbling from the inside. Through the understanding of archives as entangled with everything, I argue for the value of understanding ourselves and our creations as part of nature. Nature is a category we created to feel better about exploiting everything around us. It cannot go on anymore. 



THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
This research utilises the concept of archives to deconstruct the Finnish nation, viewing archives as both physical and ephemeral, inclusive and exclusive, and fundamentally entangled. The framework builds on the ideas of Gloria Wekker, Diana Taylor, Aaro Tupasela, Jutta Ahlbeck-Rehn, and Bishnupriya Ghosh to challenge conventional understandings of archives and knowledge production.
TIn my research, the archive functions as a tool in order to deconstruct the Finnish nation, through the understanding of archives as, at once, physical and ephemeral, as sites of inclusion and exclusion, and then as entangled. Gloria Wekker (2016) uses cultural archives as a central concept in her study of Dutch, and European, white innocence. These function as “unacknowledged [reservoirs]” (3) which not only are instrumental to “dominant meaning-making” (ibid.), they also inform how we are socialised, and how racism and oppressive structures are embedded, and consequently naturalised within.
Physical and Ephemeral 
Diana Taylor (2003) explores the role which the legitimization of writing has played in the understanding of performances as ways of recording knowledge. She expands upon archives beyond the dominant representations of physicality and organisation to include repertoire/performance (19). Within western epistemologies, writing has become synonymous with memory and knowledge, representing embodiment while at the same time reducing embodiment to “narrative descriptions” (16). She posits performance as another mode of archiving (4). However, performances are varied, and in contrast with the written word, the power of performance in recording knowledge is sometimes regarded as “ephemeral” (5). Hegemonic understanding is that written archives are enduring, made of paper and rock, while embodied archives are ephemeral (19). A rift is illuminated between the physical and the ephemeral, where physicality comes to be related to a truer truth than ephemerality.
Taylor and Wekker both problematise the dominant representations of archives as physical, as uncorrupted rooms filled with meticulously organised documents (Taylor 2003, 20; Wekker 2016, 19). Taylor outlines two myths pertaining to physical archives: they are “unmediated” and resistant to “change, corruptibility, and political manipulation” (19). These myths obscure how physical archives are decisions made in order to represent something. That which is left out, lost, forgotten or uninterpreted does not hold a place in this archive, even though it is part of knowing. Within the physical archive, the objects it holds are the archive and are archived, and are understood as relating to reality. However, archives actually only reflect dominant understandings, and wishes, of reality. In this way, archives have “potential for self-referentiality” in that archives are created through archiving (Macho 2013, 31). Macho writes of “speaking objects”, in the way that objects like seals or stamps come to stand in for “the externally materialized voice of authority or the author” (34). Physical archives rely on this authority, not necessarily in preserving the original author of a text, instead in the mediation of it contributing to dominant narratives. 
Inclusion/Exclusion
Aaro Tupasela (2016) compares the role of two doctors in influencing the Finnish nation-formation. The “textual collection of oral traditions” of Elias Lönnrot in his compilation and authoring of the Finnish national epic, Kalevala, and the “biomedical research into rare diseases” (123) which Reijo Norio spearheaded, both construct similarities between finns “through recording stories.” (128). Despite the differences in the academic fields, Tupasela outlines how they both employ “similar selection processes [...] to determine criteria for inclusion and exclusion” (123), in order to create homogeneous representations of Finns. These both make up part of the Finnish cultural archive, and within them choices have been made in order to create a cohesive narrative. Comparing textual analysis with biological analysis illuminates a transdisciplinary approach which in itself contends with the inclusion/exclusion of the separation of academic fields. 
Jutta Ahlbeck-Rehn (2006) writes about the construction of female madness in relation to the mental asylum on the Själö island, and suggests that social problems can be medicalised. She writes that medicine “can not be understood as a ‘clean’ category, unaffected by social, historical and cultural factors”, and that “deconstructed approaches to analysis can show how madness and the body are made meaningful” (44). In this, medicine and the scientific process exist within frameworks of social control. In addition, Tupasela’s article questions the naturalised notion of science, by representing the constructedness of both doctor’s processes. This should not be understood as a sceptical claim, rather this illuminates the biases and perspectives which exist within all knowledge compilation, and the implications these naturalisations have on people. 
Embodiment Reveals Entanglement 
Slowly, infection takes hold, and lines begin to blur. Bishnupriya Ghosh (2023) writes about epidemic media in the face of a persistently epidemic-filled future. Epidemic media materialise processes which are “otherwise imperceptible” (13), through the understanding that epidemics are made intelligible with the feedback of “structural forces”, be it colonialism, capitalism or patriarchy (7). Those most impacted by epidemics are those most marginalised. These structural forces exist also within our understanding of illness. In addition to the myth of unbiased medical practices, Ahlbeck-Rehn (2006) looks at the uneven admission of women into mental asylums. Mental wellbeing in women is often linked the proper “assimilation” into “female gender roles” (47), and medicalisation can then be seen as a tool of force women to comply. Structural forces do not only put marginalised people at risk of contracting illness, illness itself becomes constructed as a tool for control. 
While Ahlbeck-Rehn writes of the problematic perceived cleanliness of medicine, Ghosh (2022) observes how “repeated evocations of ‘clean data’ (meeting standards that other research facilities could trust) and intimations of ‘dirty’ excesses scuttling precise inscription” make up laboratory work (18). Cleanliness as a representation of trust is created through the agreed upon selection process of inclusion/exclusion in presenting findings. Clarity of one phenomena comes “at the cost of others” (19). However, Ghosh does not argue for the disassembling of the scientific process, instead she underlines how the “medial actions” of laboratory work are “material performances”. If performances are ephemeral, and when “performance practices lack the staying power to transmit vital knowledge”, whose “memories, traditions, and claims to history disappear” (Taylor 2003, 5)? There lies value in the process of creating what we recognise as knowledge, and it is within these performances that entanglements with the deemed unimportant are illuminated, and given a stage. Through severed connections, exclusions take shape.
“Immune systems have memories” writes Ghosh (2023, 23) in the way that they remember the pathogens they have fought, and so do our “muscular and nervous systems” (ibid.). The “living systems” which make up our bodies (our selves) are sentient, and it is by tuning into “these intelligences” that we can understand the “causal interrelatedness of planetary existence” (ibid., through Stengers [need to find in bibliography]). I understand the infinite depth of entanglement, not as a single phenomena to study, but as archives through which everything exists, or has existed, or will exist. It is a way to broaden the scope which has been narrowed in pursuit of knowledge perhaps, but also in the pursuit of power. Taylor’s performances function as archives which both simultaneously allow for inventory and for “individual agency”, for the embodiment of memory and knowledge (20), and Wekker writes that the cultural archive exists “in many things” pertaining to how we view ourselves, our systems and the world, but that it most importantly “is between our ears and in our hearts and souls” (19). Through performance, or embodiment, we can begin to see entanglement.
 
This theoretical framework positions archives as multifaceted entities that reflect and shape societal structures. By challenging traditional notions of knowledge preservation and emphasising the interconnectedness of all forms of knowledge, the framework underscores the importance of recognizing and addressing biases, inclusions, and exclusions in the production and understanding of knowledge.


CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS THE ARCHIVE?
The Swedish kingdom and religion come intertwined. In some ways, King Gustav Vasa of Sweden (r. 1523–1560) spearheaded the reform from Catholicism to Lutheranism in 16th century Sweden and Finland (Lavery 2017, 208). As he took over the resources and authority of the church, all aspects of it “lay open to question” (ibid.). The church and monarchy come together in the process of creating a nation. Gustav Vasa’s attraction to Lutheran reform because Lutheran reformers “legitimized the king’s takeover of the church’s wealth and power” and due to “his own desire for a simpler Christianity” (ibid.). His stake in the reform is personal rather than ecclesiastical.
Growing up in Finland, I went to Swedish primary and secondary school. It is written in the Finnish constitution that the syllabus, funding and quality of education are to remain the same across municipalities and languages of instruction (Ministry of Education 2010). Still, differences continue to exist between schools, be they minute or consequential. Although Swedish history exists within Finnish history, going to a Swedish-language school meant that more material is geared toward Swedish history. I remember learning about Gustav Vasa’s involvement in Lutheran reform, and how clear his greed seemed to me, he who saw the wealth of the catholic church as a potential for regaining control over Swedish finances. The church lay open to question but the monarchy did not, at least yet. 
On the tails of Lutheran reformation, we find ourselves on the Southwestern coast of Finland. In 1616, King Gustav II Adolf (the grandson of the aforementioned Gustav Vasa) decrees that the leprosy hospital in Turku, the capital at the time, should be moved to Själö. This is the first statement in Själö - Island of Souls (Petronella 2020). The second is that the king believes “the infectious nature of the disease to be God’s punishment for a life of sin” (Petronella 2020, 00:03:15). Religion continues to be a tool for control, just as it was for his grandfather. On screen, a blueprint for the construction of the hospital accompanied with thin white text, serves to introduce the subjects of the documentary, the island Själö and its hospital, as well as the archive. They converge on the blueprint, and on the other pages of floor plans and data entries, yellowed by age and creased through meticulous folding. I will examine how they converge within the archive (within the creases), but also outside of it (in the dust and on the ground). 
What does the physical archive look like?
The physical exists in two different functions on Själö. On the one hand, in the old wards and rooms of the asylum, researchers study the island and the Baltic sea which surrounds it, on behalf of Turku University. On the other hand, the archive saves documents about the construction of the hospital, as well as on the patients who used to be housed there. In it are the “supposedly enduring materials (i.e., texts, documents, buildings, bones)” which are considered more important than “the so-called ephemeral repertoire of embodied practice/knowledge (i.e., spoken language, dance, sports, ritual)” (Taylor 2003, 19). In this way, the choices made in creating this archive are related to the relationship Finnish hegemonic culture has with materials of preservation. 
In a similar vein, the physicality of the research facility exists through its practices. Scientific practices create distinctions between “clean” and “dirty” data, which are attributed to the process in which they are gathered (Ghosh 2022, 18). It is in the creation of this dirty data, in the “lively materialities that proliferate at the edges of scientific practices” (18), where the physical and the intangible are found to intersect. To further this connection, Ghosh (19) calls these materialities “material performances”, just like Taylor (2003, 19) understands performance as a way to include embodiment in archiving. 
The inside is introduced through the view down a microscope, in bright green lines against a black background (figure). There is a cut to Jasmin Inkinen, looking down a microscope (figure 2), and then a cut to another microscope sample, closer up this time (figure 3). Jasmin’s narration comes in, talking about the collective effort in the pursuit of gathering data on the island. In Finnish, she explains how “the research material collected over time is one of a kind”, how collecting data is a ritual. It is this process which has remained the same for fifty years which she finds valuable, and by adhering to this method of data collection, meaning will appear. Archiving is then a method for research, where meaning is discovered through the unity of samples collected overtime. Petronella follows Jasmin as she contributes to this archive. 
In order to show this process, Petronella cuts in between shots of the researchers working, and the microscopic images. In order to gather samples for the furthering of meaning, microbial performances are observed, compared with previous observations, and their normalities and oddities are noted down. The clean cuts of the scientific process are embedded into the microscope. Inherently, the view down a microscope is limited. In order to study the small parts of the environment, researchers view them through a circular window. Momentarily, the world is reduced to a singular plane, a clean “cut” (Ghosh 2023, 19) where variables are controlled and taken out of context in order to study a specific aspect of the sample. This disconnection is highlighted as the deep focus of the researchers is accompanied by the stuttering sounds of working the microscope. There is a trance-like quality to this process, highlighting how the space within the microscope for a moment takes over. 
In a way, this microscopial plane forms part of the heterotopia of the island, the space only accessed through the microscope and through the observation of the sample. Foucault (1986, 25) outlines the third principle of the heterotopia as being “capable of juxtaposing in a single real place several spaces, several sites that are in themselves incompatible”. In the lab, there are three spaces. The physical space, where the researchers are sitting at a table, working (figure 4), becoming echoes of one another as they all mimic the same actions. At the same time in Jasmin’s narration, she highlights how the “sampling has to be repeated in the same way as it has already occurred in the last 50 years”, and so the simultaneous mimicry serves the purpose of consistency. The researchers are separated from the microscopic level, where small beings move around in samples prepared (Figure 1) and from the historical building itself, which contains remnants of the functions used to contain those deemed “incurable” (probably ahlgren or whatever), as she travels between the two spaces. Petronella navigates between these different spaces through cutting close ups of the researchers with shots of the microscope, and then the wide shot of the room in which the researchers are working. In the wide shot, the researchers are framed in the middle of the bottom of the screen. They stand out against the white painted, green-tinted white walls, their blandness representing how the building functions as a vessel for the space inside the microscope. The microscopic images function as the inverse of the room. They are dark, with spots of green brightness and light, illuminating the samples. 
The ritual of researching, which Jasmin mentions, echoes with the formation of national identity with religion in Finland. This is in line with Wekker’s (2016) explanation of cultural archives existing “in the way we think, do things, and look at the world” (19). Though Finnish national identity was formed in the pursuit of separation from Swedish and Russian culture (Tupasela 2016, 131), Christianity has informed these various efforts of unifying the nation. Even when Finland gained independence, “professor and politician e. n. Setälä argued in 1920 that Finland [...] should act as the guardian of Western culture against the barbarous east” (Keskinen 2019, 174). Finnish nation building, and Finnish culture in its contemporary state is still heavily influenced by Lutheranism (Sinnemäki et al. 2019, 28). Själö as an institution is tied to Christianity, with a chapel and a priest visiting the asylum throughout its existence, as well as the proof of identification being a letter from the priests (Ahlbeck-Rehn 2008, 94). I bring this up to analyse how within scientific practises, though rejecting religious practices through the idea of secularisation and sometimes even in opposition to each other, echo Lutheran practises. In the same way, the Finnish cultural archive, despite its secularisation, has these same echoes and structures of Lutheranism. 
Petronella highlights these echoes, through framing, shifting the context from one to the other. As Jasmin says that the beauty of sampling lies in its impossibility of being created alone, Petronella cuts to a bucket of fish and a hand wrapped in a plastic glove. In this scene, the researcher is alone. And yet, the sampling could not occur without the dead fish. A sense of repetitiveness is imbued through the rhythmic movements of the researcher. As Jasmin mentioned, consistent repetitiveness is essential to upholding the institute's time-series analyses. This repetitiveness is also deduced from the bucket full of fish, showing that the researcher will be doing the same actions over and over. She cuts up the fish from the bottom, emptying its innards and placing the fillet onto a scale. In a sense, this is a sacrifice, but instead of sacrificing to a god, it is being sacrificed in the pursuit of knowledge. This action is emphasised as direct sunlight shines down on the fish being cut. Then, a close up of the researcher's face, bowed and hidden in the shadow, calling forth images of praying in her stillness. Then, a new fish is being cut and examined, placing the researcher back in the context of ecology. 
Jasmin’s narration continues, as Petronella once again focuses on a researcher at a microscope. This time, another researcher, an older woman stares into the apparatus, slightly trembling in time with her using the focusing lever (Figure. The diegetic background noise of the lab environment imperceptibly deepens, until it grows into a distant echoing, as though recording whale song underwater. While the woman continues to stare into that separate space of the microscope, Jasmin says that “all knowledge already exists”, but that “it doesn’t have meaning until someone decides to study it, and is interested in it”. The woman continues to look into the microscope, and then Petronella again cuts to the world inside. This time, it is not tinted in cold greens at all (Figure). Instead, it is a warm brown, where the background is light against the silhouetted samples. This break in the consistent colour scheme emphasise the separation created in the space of the lab and the space in the microscope. When Jasmine continues by saying that knowledge can be “made visible” by “knowing how to read it”, the connection between knowledge and expertise is made clear. The microscopic space is only beneficial because the researcher’s can read them. However, as I argued before, the researcher’s not only read the space, they momentarily enter it. Without embodiment, there would be no scientific findings. 
Paranoid preservation
Spaces are then not only read and understood, they are entered. Heterotopias maintain “slices in time” (Foucault 1986, 26), or even a complete lack of time, within them. In this way, they function as a certain temporal preservation. This is certainly true for archives, within which documents from centuries completely alien to us now, are shelved next to other documents which we now deem similar or relevant to each other. By understanding the archive as one with its own temporality and logic, the idea that the “objects located there might mean something outside the framing of the archival impetus itself” is discredited (Taylor 2003, 19). The space is created through the process of selection, classification and analysis of material (ibid.). And so the myth of the “unmediated archive” (ibid.) is broken when the archive is understood as a heterotopia. 
	The heterotopia of Själö is connected through its facade. From the microscope, Petronella switches to a shot of the North-facing facade (Figure ). It is a reminder that everything Petronella shows us, and tells us about, happens in this building or because of this building. Within this building, despite a change in their function and look, are the rooms within which the researchers work, which used to be wards for the ill. Within this building, the archive holds its image. Petronella slowly fades from the facade to its sketched counterpart, entering the archive through the facade (Figure ). The archive is understood to be within the building, but an understanding of its size and shape, or position in the building is never explored. The strict physicality of the archive is questioned; the understanding of the archive as a heterotopia is strengthened. 
	The camera pans along the shelves of the archive in Själö asylum, never entering the alleys, never pausing on a specific title or set of documents. Everything is bound in cardboard then labelled with white pieces of paper. There is unity in the collection of knowledge. The room is illuminated through fluorescent overhead lighting, casting harsh shadows onto shelves, furthering the consistency of the green tint. The deep focus of the camera lens allows for the abundance of information collected (Figure ). This is the physical archive on Själö. A phone call between Petronella and a woman who has studied the archive crackles over top. Petronella asks how it felt to go into it for the first time. The woman answers that it felt magical. She also answers that she does not know who the archive was created by. Only some documents were kept and those documents reference the values and interests of a present day person. She laughs when she says that the archive “maybe doesn’t actually exist”. Due to exclusions in the archive, its existence is questioned. 
When the woman on the phone interacts with the physicality of the archive, ideas of physicality can be constructed through Taylor’s (2003) text on performance and archives. The current which runs through the notion of an archive is its purpose of organising knowledge. Due to the value attributed to the western written word, this knowledge is found in documents (Taylor 2003, 16). The physical document is more valuable than the “ephemeral” performance, it is understood to be enduring (19). And yet, even if paper and rock persists, the choices involved in their preservation complicate their strict physicality. When the woman on the phone says that the archive may not exist, she is referring to the act of archiving and the role which it plays in the creation of an archive. The physical objects do not matter, it is the actions and choices related to preserving them which the archive represents. For example, choosing to preserve the sketch of the facade existing inside the archive inside the building with its facade well-preserved and unchanged is what creates the archive. In this way, archives are “vehicles of self-description, self-legitimation, and authentication” (Macho 2013, 31). Archives are self-referential, and through this referentiality, the temporality remains fixed and separate. 
When the woman on the phone questions the existence of the archive, she is contending with the illusion of reality related to space. If the Själö archive has been created through the choices of those looking back, instead of those looking straight, it ceases to exist. According to Foucault (1986, 26), the “museums and libraries have become heterotopias in which time never stops building up and topping its own summit, whereas in the seventeenth century, even at the end of the century, museums and libraries were the expression of an individual choice”. Because of this, there is a dissonance for the woman on the phone between the archive on Själö is an archive of the 20th century, if it is posturing as a 17th century creation. During this rustly phone call, the camera pans along the shelves of the archive, first to the left and then to the right. Everything looks similar, the alleys and the material (Figure ). It is disorienting, and brings forward a sense of unlimitedness, as though the potential for new corridors of books and documents will open up at the next turn. The physical archive, then, despite different approaches to creation corresponding to different centuries of thinking, exists in a temporal vacuum as it attempts to collect all time in one place. Reading the physical archive as such allows for entanglements between entities of power and entities of preservation to come into view. 

CHAPTER 2: WHAT IS EXCLUDED?
Mikael Agricola is considered the “founder of literary Finnish” (Häkkinen 2016, 149). He writes many books and translations in the aims of the Lutheran belief that the bible and church sermons shall be given in the language of the people (38). His first book is the primer Abckiria (transl. ABC book), within which he includes Finnish translations of material “that belonged to most catechisms of the time” (Lavery 2017, 224). He was a priest, and studied at the University of Wittenberg, where Martin Luther was a professor in theology (Häkkinen 2016, 37). Along with the other Finnish students, he worked on translating the New Testament (40). He published the fully translated version in 1548, where he “summarizes Finland’s history in a way that justifies Finland’s belonging to the Swedish realm” (Lavery 2017, 224). Agricola is now considered a national hero for his writings and translations, but when he lived nationalism as an idea had not yet taken form, and though his efforts were recognised, they were not heralded (Häkkinen 2016, 149). 
Little is known about Agricola’s personal life, to the point that any portraits of him are imaginings of artists, painted centuries after his death (Häkkinen 2016, 31). However, it is known, through the analysis of his writings, that he grew up in Torsby in Pernå/Pernaja (ibid.). It is believed that he was born around 1510 (ibid., Lavery 2017, 212). Lavery (ibid.) states that Agricola’s father was a peasant, but according to Häkkinen (2016, 32), despite the writings in 19th century literature, “archaeological excavations carried out [at the site of Agricola’s childhood home,] prove the existence of a wealthy rural homestead”. Here again, the discrepancies between archives and archaeology present various readings of this nationally heralded figure, and within these discrepancies questions arise. A narrative is created of Agricola as “the son of a poor fisher who became a great national figure and benefactor of all of the Finnish people” (150). His efforts of creating a unified Finnish language from the many languages which existed on the land have earned him the title as the “father of the Finnish language” (Lavery 2017, 209). In unification, “literary Finnish became a connective thread between the different dialects” (Häkkinen 2016, 8), rather than representing all the various languages and dialects present on the land. When the father of Finnish language is a poor fisherman’s boy, the structures of class enforced through the Swedish monarchy and through religion remain unquestioned. 
“Untreatable” Mental Illness as a Tool For Exclusion
The exclusions within the Finnish cultural archive are created through rejections. Rejecting the varieties of language in order to create a whole (Häkkinen hsdhuhwef). Creating a “common linguistic corpus” in order to reject Russian and Swedish identity (Tupasela 2016, 131). In order to be part of a people, rejections of others are made. When institutions are centred around a written language, an exclusion occurs. Though there is debate over Swedish colonialism of Finland, power relations within the Nordics were established through the development of racial biology, wherein Swedish thinkers were “world-renowned in the area” and “were central actors in establishing and spreading this idea” of inferiority within the Nordics (Keskinen 2019, 173). Language functions as another marker of these racial barriers, where Swedish-speaking Finns “emphasized their relations to Sweden and the nordic race”, and developed theories about “Finnish working-class people” being racially inferior (174). This racialisation within the Finnish population was founded in class ideologies (Ahlbeck-Rehn 2006, 122), and posited that class differences were genetic. Categories of  “the healthy and the unhealthy” were drawn from these theories of racial biology, and so those who were seen as lower class were more “susceptible to mental weakness, alcoholism and criminality” (123). On the other hand, through the project of modernising Finland in line with Finnish nationalism, these same racial theories were levied and persecuted against groups within Finland, namely the Sámi and the Roma (179). Finnish, unified at least partly in the pursuit of Luther’s ideas about religion, the language of this Modern Land, was forcibly taught to these groups in residential schools (176, 177). These ethnocidal endeavours do not yet figure greatly in the mainstream talks about Finnish nationalism, and the scope of this essay remains on the Finnish cultural archive in relation to understandings of mental illness. 
	Those sent to Själö asylum were considered incurable, says Petronella, and thus the remote island functioned well as a space for exile. She shows this part of history outside of the archive, moving from the illuminating fluorescent light to the shadows. The hall, which figures throughout the documentary, is dark in contrast with the bright day outside. A woman mops the floor, silhouetted against the bright window (Figure ). This shot could almost function as a reenactment in the way it is kept out of time. The alternative temporality of the hospital is presented here as a “rediscovery of time” (Foucault 1986, 26), through the nondescript decor of the hall and the echoing of tasks repeated across the centuries. Additionally then, the soundtrack cuts out, leaving the ambient noise in full focus, as though emphasising the continued mundanity within this asylum. Then, the island as a space of exclusion comes into full view. A cut to a hallway similar to the one with the mopping woman, similarly shrouded in shadow, except this one is blocked off by an iron gate, a silhouetted lock hanging from it (Figure ). A space once closed, now open to the public. Yet, it continues to function under governmental institutions, and thus it remains similarly exclusionary, as heterotopias do (ibid.). 
	Petronella presents the letters of the invisible archive through narration to show their exclusion from the cultural archive. From the locked gate, a cut to the closed window. The sun is setting outside, but it remains out of reach (Figure ). Over top, a narration or reenactment of one of the letters crackles. This is one of the few letters in Finnish. The letter details the routines on the island. The post comes three times per week. The doctor twice per week. Almost imperceptibly, as the letter goes on, the camera moves closer to the window, a slow dolly in. 
“In the day”, she says, “we are in the big hall, locked in.”
The gate is a remnant of this, although has continued to be used since. The intensity builds as the camera moves closer to the outside, but cannot exit through the open window. One of two functions for heterotopias is to act as a space that is “another real space, as perfect, as meticulous, as well arranged as ours is messy, ill constructed, and jumbled” (Foucault 1986, 27). The window panes emphasise this control, the ability box life into an hourly schedule aimed to subdue. The shadows around the window emphasise the woman’s position as locked in, looking out at grounds she cannot enter. 
Själö mental asylum surely aimed to create such a space, in the aims of containing the unwanted and ill. As mentioned, the women deemed untreatable on Själö were mostly working class women (Ahlbeck-Rehn 2006, 195), in the way that the classifications of mental illness has its roots in class discourse. However, the act of sending women to Själö was an act of (social) isolation, as the women of lower classes were represented as “dirty and dirtied” (ibid.). When the camera moves even closer to the window, the woman says: “we may walk in the yard for one hour a day, but are not allowed outside the gate”. Their isolation not only extended to the island, it was enforced to the building. The lower classes posed a risk to proper society. As such, the functions of Själö as a heterotopia were used to subjugate these women according to their class. The island itself functions as a space where the values of the cultural archive are most concentrated. Back then, it was the continued order of social classes. Now, it is the pursuit of leverage, be it knowledge or money. 
Soul Island, Seal Island: The Role of Language in Archives
Language is the basis of the written archive, and so the basis of institutional power. At the same time, language is how we communicate. Writing and embodied culture exist in tandem with each other, where the position of writing used to be “highly valued” but remained for “the specialised few” (Taylor 2003, 17). Within names, through language, we present and preserve knowledge. Själö is a testament to this. The Swedish name of the island translates to Soul Island (själ and ö), which is an instinctively aptly named place in regards to the history of the island. However, the etymology of the name is more complicated than that. Själ, in this case, refers to the old spelling for the word seal (which is now säl), in relation to the history of seal hunting in the area (Huttunen, n.d.). The island was probably known as a good place for hunting amongst seal hunters. The fact that the name now means Soul Island is coincidental. However, it is easier to control the “space of written culture [...] than embodied culture” (Taylor 2003, 17), and so systems are institutionalised which centre around writing. Power can then be “developed and enforced without the input of the great majority of the population” (18). The creation of a written language, in pursuit of Lutheran ideology, at the expense of various regional dialects and languages, indicates that Agricola holds a position of power. 
The Finnish cultural archive is invisible. According to Wekker, neither documents, nor the institutions within which documents exist, are the cultural archive (2015, 19). It is something which “people have been socialised into, that becomes natural, escaping consciousness”, though it may overlap with the physical archive (20). When Petronella finds the invisible archives between the shelves and in the shadows of the physical one, it remains tied to the structural powers of physicality, as without its physical traces, it would not exist at all. In defining this invisible archive, she engages in a process not dissimilar to the two doctors in Tupasela’s article where “stories and cases” (2016, 135) are connected in order to unify the Finnish nation. Concise narratives are what drive the definitions of the Finnish nation-state, in creating “similarity and unity among Finns themselves” (126). Similarly the the invisible archive of Själö, the invisible archive of Kalevala exists in the “differences between Lönnrot’s field notes and the subsequent publication”, but was careful to make these notes public in order to show where his edited work came from (132). Petronella is central to her presentation of the physical as well as the invisible archive, does not question the construction of a physical archive, she instead broadens it. Through these actions of transparency, invisible archives become part of the Finnish cultural archive. 
As explored in the last section, ideas grounded in racial biology about genetics can be used to justify exclusions. However, genetics can also contribute to the understanding of inclusion. Reijo Norio’s project of categorising genetic diseases as more prevalent in Finland, and in this way contributing to the “development of a particular worldview relating to origin and identity in Finland whereby Finns are considered to be genetically and culturally homogenous” (127). Here, the inclusion of diseases which spread genetically function to define the people as one, whereas mental illness was seen as a disease which required isolation, even if both were rooted in genetics. Almost all of the documents are written in meticulous Swedish script, black lines of ink in perfect horizontal and vertical existence which mirrors the drawings (figure something). However, on some of the documents, softer graphite rests, written in Finnish. Petronella’s manicured hand folds away a blueprint to reveal a floor plan, with lead or graphite markings for instructions about adding lights (Figure ). This document shows the changes in language dominance from Swedish to Finnish. It potentially also symbolises how “legal and social structures of Sweden” (Latomaa & Nuolijärvi 2002, 97) were embedded into Finnish systems, centering Swedish language, and therefore Swedes were the intellectuals and Finns were the workers. Petronella does not comment on the historial changes which exist on the paper, showing the papers through still shots while sometimes adjusting the pages. However, the change in the language of the Finnish institutions can be seen when comparing the ubiquitous Swedish of the archives, with the ubiquitous Finnish of the researchers as well as the woman on the phone.
The reason for this focus on genetics relies on the legitimacy given to scientific explanation, as opposed to traditional explanation. However, these explanations form each other. For both Noijo and Lönnrot, they created their narratives by travelling around the country, speaking to people and going through church registers to look at the documentation they hold (134). Similarly, Petronella connects stories and cases, and mentions and entries, constructing an archive of inconsistencies and absences in order to problematize the power of institutions to subjugate. And yet, she presents that which she finds in the archive. The letters, for example, are archived in the physical archive because the authors of those letters most likely were upper class, since writing was not a commonplace skill (Latomaa & Nuolijärvi 2002, 109). Petronella similarly creates a narrative, though her approach is perhaps rooted in the ephemeral and lending from the scientific in order to create the invisible archive. This archive then, does not deconstruct the cultural archive as much as it reframes it. 
Reframing functionality is a characteristic of heterotopia. These changes to function are “according to the synchrony of the culture in which it occurs” (Foucault 1986, 25). The change in the function of archives now lies in the fact that the idea of nations and the Finnish nation have become naturalised, a steady point in the cultural archive. Documents of the construction are constantly revisited throughout the documentary, within which, this change of functionality is found. They no longer serve the purpose of instructing how to build the asylum, instead they serve the purpose of remembering how buildings used to be constructed. Similarly, archives no longer serve the purpose of defining a culture or a nation, instead they function to uphold the legitimacy of them. And so, when Petronella defines the invisible archive through her findings in the physical archive, she aims to grant legitimacy to the women and the lepers who are a forgotten part of Finnish history, but does not contest the nation itself.  

CHAPTER 3: ENTANGLEMENT
As I have argued through Foucault (1986), the functions of heterotopias may change in line with the historical unfolding of society, but they remain heterotopias all the same. In this understanding of the asylum as a heterotopia, the island outside of the building has changed as well. The outside presented a barrier for the patients at the asylum, a heterotopia of exclusion which only the healthy, that is to say the accepted, were allowed to enter. Now, the outside functions as the lifeblood of the heterotopia, the place of extraction from where the researchers gather their materials to contribute to the creation of knowledge. Both of these uses of the heterotopia of the outside are related to naturalised science truths. 
	The sequence which this analysis is based on is introduced by Petronella’s hand, as the sounds of insects in the night proliferate. They buzz and squeak. They also bang into lights, creating crackling noises which almost mimic a fire. The processes of scientific research have changed in the four centuries of the institution of Själö’s existence, and the power of fact is present in the cultural archive. Laboratories, like the one on Själö are a heterotopia within which “clean data” are separated from “dirty excesses”, through processes which have become standard (Ghosh 2022, 18). These heterotopias facilitate trust in the findings of research. Ahlbeck-Rehn (2006), in writing about medicalisation and its similar cultural understanding as a “clean category” wherein the “social, historical and cultural factors” go unobserved, writes of the consequences these distinctions can have if they go unacknowledged. Paying attention to these excesses, the process of deciding on exclusions, is acknowledging the “material performances” (Ghosh 2022, 19) of science. Petronella’s hand is illuminated in a warm light (Figure ), which sets it apart from the rest of the shots, which are lit up in artificial bright green (Figure ). A sense of uncomfortable entanglement is called on in the way that insects crawl along her hand, as well as a distinction. The physical uncomfortable touching of insects versus the artificial unobtrusive touching of insects. 
The sounds of the sequences are recognisable as summer nights surrounded by creatures awoken in the moonlight, but the images Petronella presents are distorted through that unnatural green light. In this contrast, familiarity is confronted with the exclusivity of scientific methods. The aversion to touching the other creatures in the night perhaps lays in the “species distinctions” we have naturalised, even though they have arisen from “motivated scientific-cultural performances” (Ghosh 2022, 5). This aversion echoes that of the exile and isolation of the mentally ill in the asylum. The green light is a heightened projection of the role humans play in the world, in the way that it modifies the behaviour of these insects to swarm. These shots are joined by the poem, which is split throughout the film. Similarly, it creates an alien image of the trees, as they are green in the sense of day, not in the sense of night, and they contrast with the trees behind them. As the green light shines, the voice whispers that she was “brought from far away”. Her voice is almost imperceptible, swelling and shrinking like the sea, as the documentary continues. The poem functions as an explicit performance, emphasising the performance of the green light in distinction between human and animal. It is through these naturalisations of ideas of distinction that the patients were sent to the island, and it is through these naturalisations that fear of nature begins to fester. 
The artificial green light is a thread between the outside and the inside, bleeding over. Jasmin Inkinen says that knowledge is out there, it just has to be read. A translation has to occur between species, in order to gain further understanding. What, then, of the voice, quietly whispering alongside the buzzing of moths, who says “minulla ei ole paperia.” (I don't have [identificatory] paper), “minulla on nimi.” (I have a name)? At these two phrases, at the point of legitimacy, Petronella cuts away from the insect-filled nighttime, to the green world of the microscope. The speaker in the poem has no tangible way of proving her name, but still she has one. Names are both physical and intangible. In the physical sense, they can be binding, where the signature presupposes comprehensive literacy but also the existence of a “a judicial system including personal and civil rights” (Macho 2013, 41). A lack of written identification leads to a lack of rights, then and now. 
	The camera rolls through the wood in the twilight, dark blues and greens, following a fallen birch tree, shielded by others in front of it (Figure ). Specks of blue light, the evening sky, poke through tree tops. Petronella’s voice is clear as she tells us of the data entries recorded about the women, reports which Petronella describes as being recorded with a “clinical gaze”, while the smooth dolly motion to echoes this clinicality in its cleanliness. She describes how they are weighed, their temperatures and pulses are measured, menstruation days and force feedings are noted precisely. Their moods are described with different symbols. The camera moves to the left, signifying the way Petronella is looking back on these histories. Trees stand out vertically against this decomposing tree, mimicking the forms of people. When she says that of the 192 women sent to the island, 92 were buried there, the trees function as memorials to those people, as gravestones. 
	Petronella’s narration leaves us for the whispering poem, remaining outside, moving slowly away from the purple sky glinting through the shadowed treetops, through which the shadows slowly engulf the light (Figure ). The whisperer says that she “runs down the dark road”, where the cover of night allows for a grasping at freedom. At this point, a chorus of other whispered, far away voices echo, distinguishing the poem from the other forms of narration in the way that it melds into the sound track. Tsing (2015) writes that “we learn over and over that humans are different from the rest of the living world because we look forward” (20), and so we reject our affinity with the non-human. And this rejection is felt within us, since we are made up of the non-human. Tsing mentions entanglement as a perspective to include the non-human (page bitch), and Ghosh (2023) further explores entanglement in regards to epidemics. She positions humans as being in entanglement with the “living systems” which enable our life processes (what page bitch). The entanglements have been invisibilised through the boundaries of human and non-human. It is easier to exploit and destroy something if it bears no resemblance to oneself (source). The women on the asylum were often of a lower class, and understandings of genetic reasons for weakness contributed to their medicalisation. Similarly, then, women were more often sent to mental institutions because of their forced performance of “female gender roles” (Ahlbeck-Rehn 2006, 47). When the poem emphasises the safety of darkness, it is invisibility which allows for survival in this heterotopia of compensation (Foucault 1986, ???). However, heterotopias remain all the same. 

CONCLUSION


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

