by Andrew Madding,  
club photographer for the  
Royal Victoria Yacht Club.  
The front cover represents everything it  
means to be a singlehanded sailor:  
High winds (two reefs in the main and  
a storm jib lashed on the bow) the tiller  
under my knee with the spin sheet in  
one hand – bracing myself with  
the other.  
The back cover represents everything else  
it means to be a singlehanded sailor:  
the afternoon nap. 
Foreword  
I met Andy when he came to help out my preparations on Ocean Planet for  the 2004-2005 Vendee Globe. A nice guy and good sense of humor; after all  he's Canadian.  
In many ways he represents all those who have become successful solo  sailors on their own nickel; learning slowly from a mix of hard-earned  experience, digging up obscure info, and sharing with each other.  
It's not like this sort of experience is falling off trees. While a lot of jabber  about singlehanded sailing can be found on discussion forums and the odd  magazine articles, this is the first collection of the varied aspects of the sport  put together in one place. It takes thousands of hours of sailing to get the  kind of knowledge contained in this book. It also takes a lot of  experimentation and a willingness to be wrong nine times before getting it  right on the tenth.  
There are many recipes for successful solo sailing; as many as the actual  sailors who do it. And there are many different levels of personal  priorities. However many, many of the same mistakes are made over and  over by those new to the sport, and by those who simply think they have it  already figured out. Most of those mistakes can be prevented by carefully  analyzing what Andy has put together.  
This is good stuff, and I'm especially glad that he did it, because now I don't  have to.  
Cheers,  
Bruce Schwab 

. 
t
o
o
fr
e
dn
u
 
t
e
g
 
I
 
e
m
i
t
 
y
r
e
v
e
 
"
g
n
ili
a
s
 
o
g
"
 
o
t
 
e
m
 
s
ll
e
t
 
o
h
w
 
,
n
o
r
a
h
S 
e
fi
w
 
y
m
 
o
t
 
d
e
t
a
c
i
de
d 
s
i 
ko
o
b 
s
ih
T
.
n
e
t
f
o
 
o
s
 
li
a
s
 
n
a
c
 
I
 
y
h
w
 
s
i 
s
ih
T

Thoughts, Tips, Techniques and Tactics for Singlehanded Sailing  Andrew Evans on Foolish Muse  

If I was the richest man in the world,  I’d have a bigger boat and newer sails.  But on a Saturday afternoon with only  God and the wind, I wouldn’t be any  happier than I am right now.  
Over the past ten years I’ve gone singlehanded  sailing more than eight hundred times. I started  just four days after getting my first boat and have  rarely looked back. Included in this are more  than 250 individual races. In total, it adds up to  perhaps 3,500 hours of singlehanded sailing – a  reasonable start.  
With all of these times that I have left the dock, I  have never – not even once – had a bad day on  the water. I’ve had days when things went  wrong; difficult things, expensive things. I’ve  had days when the wind blew more than most  could handle, and I’ve had days when it didn’t  blow at all. But I have never had a day that  didn’t live up to its full potential, when I wished  I had been somewhere else. I am certain that  very few sailors in the world can make the same  claim.  
Sailing gives me a sense of joy that is quite rare.  I imagine it is the same sense that the monks in  Tibet achieve. It is certainly the sense that the  Dalai Lama seems to show every time he laughs.  
But not all sailing gives me this feeling, only  single-handing. I have raced many times with a  full crew, but found myself frustrated more often  than not. Why is this? I’ve had some great  crewmates; friendly people who were fantastic to  spend time with. Perhaps I found it too  exhausting, as skipper, to be responsible for not  only my own actions, but the actions of every  other person on the boat.  
When I’m alone, I rarely need to consider what  I’m doing. The boat just reacts to my desires -  automatically. One day I was sailing alongside  
another yacht and the skipper told me that I  “wear my boat like a glove.” So I guess it could  be said that for me, sailing alone is like putting  
on a comfortable body suit that reacts to my  every whim; but sailing with a crew is like  wearing a suit of armor, where every move must  be considered, communicated, then performed.  It’s just too much work.  
I do know that if singlehanded sailing was not  possible, I wouldn’t sail at all; I’d take up  some other hobby – perhaps jigsaw puzzles.  
With this number of trips under my keel, it is  reasonable to guess that I am one of the more  experienced singlehanded sailors in the world.  Not in miles, but certainly in number of times  I’ve left the dock, number of tacks, number of  
gybes, spinnaker launches and douses, and  number of learning experiences.  
By nature, I have a real interest in efficiency. I  have always tried to find the best, most efficient  way to perform any task. Over the past decade I  have looked at every aspect of singlehanded  sailing and tried to find the best way to do it on  my boat. This compulsion gets right down to the  how long should I pause during a tack to do the  least work hauling in the sheets, and it even  includes a detailed plan on how to urinate. I’ve  taken every action down to a precise science.  
I am also not at all shy about asking questions of  other sailors. I get some funny looks at the bar  and some nasty comments on the forums, but I  would rather look stupid and learn, than look  smart and remain stupid. When I speak to other  skippers, I don’t just ask “do you use a  spinnaker?” I ask, “Tell me the exact steps you  take to pull the halyard, guy and sheet to raise  the spinnaker without fouling it?” My Olson 30  is named Foolish Muse, and my forum name is  Foolish. Some have pointed out that this seems  appropriate.  
This book is the result of an almost “academic”  study of the techniques of singlehanded sailing.  It is also the result of trial and an incredible  number of errors. For the first eight years of  sailing, I can confidently say that something 


went wrong every time I went out – every single  time. It got to the point where if I was returning  to the dock and something bad had not happened  yet, I knew that it still would happen. I have  
always pushed my boat and myself to the limit.  Of course things will go wrong when pushed.  
Every time something went wrong, I took it as a  learning experience. Most times it took making  the same mistake over and over again before I  figured out a better way. I can give an example  of raising the spinnaker. I’d had too many  broaches to count before finally figuring out the  perfect method. Because of these I know exactly  how far the water will come into my cockpit on a  broach and no longer have any fear, or even  concern, about broaching. But since the day that  I figured it out, I have not had a single broach in  any wind conditions.  
But I am not finished. That things have stopped  going wrong over the past year is only an  indication that I need a faster boat to start the  learning process again.  
The purpose of this book is to impart these  many, many lessons to the reader in the form of  tips, techniques and tactics. In some cases I will  go into a painful level of detail. My intention is  that a new singlehander should not have to go  through the trial and error phase that I followed.  If he or she can learn from my mistakes before  they leave the dock, they can push their boat  further and create their own, new mistakes.  After reading this book, and with perhaps one or  two thousand hours of practice, every sailor  should be able to wear their boat like a glove.  
This book has been downloaded about twenty  thousand times so for, and a Google search finds  more links that I could ever have imagined.  Parts of it have been translated into a dozen  languages, some of which I don’t recognize at  all. An attempt is even being made to translate  the whole thing into Polish! I’ve received  messages and contributions from all over the  world. Thank you very much.  
My Heroes:  
The single 
handed  
community  
is fairly  
small and a  
few names  
are well  
known.  
My office  
has  
autographed posters of Dame Ellen MacArthur  and Sir Robin Knox-Johnston. (It seems that of  any activity in the world, singlehanded sailors  have the best odds of being Knighted.)  
My greatest admiration goes to everyone who  left the dock on their own, personal voyage.  Some of these skippers have met their goals,  while others have not. One circumnavigator  stayed at sea for over 1,000 days, while another  ended her voyage after just a week. But they  have all been successful in undertaking a  significant life adventure. They all have stories  to tell and they are all worthy of our admiration.  Offshore singlehanded sailing is a challenge  taken by less than one out of every ten million  people in the world. In our over protective  society, it is one of the few activities where an  individual is responsible for his own safety. For  this reason alone, every singlehanded sailor  made it onto my hero list the moment they left  the dock.  
My dream started back in 1989 when I read John  Hughes “The Sailing Spirit” about the BOC  Challenge (forerunner of the Around Alone and  5 Oceans.) I followed the races very carefully in  a time before the internet, when the only news  was a recorded voice over an expensive long  distance telephone call. I plotted the positions  with coloured lines on a world map. Eleven years  later I said to my wife, “If I’m going to sail  around the world, I’d better get a boat,” and this  adventure began. 

By profession I am a lawyer and Chartered  Financial Analyst, but mostly I am President of a  small company in the solar power industry. I  live in Victoria, on the west coast of Canada and  sail out of the Royal Victoria Yacht Club. I am  blessed that this is the only region of a cold  country where I can sail year round.  
Sextant Users Guide:  
A few years ago, Santa gave me a new sextant  for Christmas. I borrowed five books from the  library, but was more confused than ever. They  all go into a level of mathematical complexity  that is well beyond my understanding, and they  all assume that I am on the deck of an aircraft  carrier, not bucking the waves on a 30’ sailboat  with the tiller under my knee. I got fed up and  determined that the only way to learn the darned  thing was to write my own guide. It can be  downloaded at:  
http://estarzinger.com/estarzinger/pdf/sextant.pdf Have fun.  
Comments and Suggestions are welcome: The best part of a web based book is the  simplicity of making changes. Readers are  welcome to send comments. With enough  updates I’ll publish a fourth edition:  
FoolishMuse@aol.com  
Corporate Sponsor Wanted:  
I am looking for a significant corporate sponsor  to take racing to the next level in offshore events.  Please contact me at FoolishMuse@aol.com.  
Here is a quote from Jerry Freeman, from the  Solo Offshore Racing Club website  
(www.offshoresolo.com)  
For most of us normal yachties  the prospect of spending 20 to 30  nights alone at sea is so far off  the scale as to be impossible to  contemplate. A recent gathering  of singlehanders provided an  ideal opportunity to study these  rare creatures in their natural  habitat before they dispersed for  their hibernation.  
Is it a macho thing, this solo  ocean racing? If so why is it  that two of the biggest boats  were sailed by the two most  petite lady skippers? They will  claim that solo yacht racing is a  cerebral sport like chess; brawn  is not required and if it is you  must be doing something wrong so  have a nap and try again. What  other sport is there where the  contestants out-sleep each other?  
From this group, it seems the  overriding qualification for solo  sailing is advanced age, being a  paid up member of the ‘Last  Chance’ brigade. Time is running  out as the years of procras tination accumulate towards a  crisis. Grandpa, casting off the  responsible years of family and  school fees, enjoys a financial  second wind. The prospect of  dying and not knowing becomes  more scary than the prospect of  going. 
The legend of the oldest race  goes back to 1960 when men were  made of sterner stuff and by gum  they had to be. That’s the  trouble with young people, no  respect, they just toddle across  the Atlantic like it was a Sunday  school outing. Where is the  drama, the passion, how are they  going to get a book deal out of  21 days and no problems?  
 The art of tuning a cat’s whisker  on the wireless has been lost in  the mists of time as the Iridium  
phone connection brings Mum and  Dad into the cabin with the  clarity and convenience of normal  conversation. There’s not even  Test Match cricket on short wave  of the BBC World Service to  endure, all gone! What about  enjoying a pipe of Condor ‘ready  rubbed’ and a glass of fine  claret under the spray hood to 

celebrate a good day’s run? You  can forget that. We are all  athletes now.  
Numerous reviews have been written about this  book. Here is my favorite, from The Watchorn:  
This month I’d like to switch gears and  get a little philosophical with you  about boating. I was recently reading  a lengthy article titled “Singlehanded  Tips,” written by Andrew Evans, who has  logged more than 3,000 hours of  singlehanded sailing in the last ten  years. The article is a great read  that runs for 147 pages. I highly  recommend it to anyone interested in  the mental and physical affects that  singlehanded sailing can have on an  individual, or for those who are toying  with the idea of rigging your vessel  for singlehanded operation.  
 The subject that interests me most in  this article is the underlying desire  for these eccentric boaters to try  singlehanded sailing in the first  place. Yes, at times everyone has a  reason for taking their boat out by  themselves and partaking in a little  solo cruise, but this type of sailing  is a far cry from bashing through  fifteen foot seas with a triple reef in  the main and sixty knot winds trying to  knock the boat over on her ear. And to  do this by yourself, with no one there  to relieve you at the wheel or to make  you a hot  
cup of  
coffee when  
you are  
tired, must  
require a  
hearty  
individual  
indeed. If  
these men  
and women  
weren’t  
finding  
their  
thrills  
sailing  
they would  
probably be  
getting  
them by  
fighting  
the Taliban in Afghanistan, base jumping off of cliffs or, even more  terrifying, trying to eat my  
girlfriend’s meatloaf without making a  funny face. (To be fair, she is a  
vegetarian. Trying to get her to cook  meat is like asking a blind man to  describe a rainbow.) I guess some  people see a mountain and just have to  climb it.  
I wonder if some people have a natural  inclination towards danger. Certainly  the idea goes against Darwin’s  thoughts; natural selection does not  favor those who stick their necks too  far into the fire. And yet I have  known too many people who simply must  do something dangerous in order to  truly feel alive. Is this rush of  adrenaline really worth the chance of  perishing in Arctic waters during a  heavy storm? Being the polar opposite  of these adrenaline junkies, I guess I  really cannot say. I can tell you I’m  jealous every time I read literature  like the aforementioned article, and  can’t help but daydream of what it must  truly be like to fight tooth and nail  for every second of survival. I can  also tell you that it simply must be  better to feel those fleeting moments  of danger and survive them than to have  never felt them at all. Andrew Evans,  I salute you.  
D.H.jr  
Pablo Neruda:  
…and now, nothing more,  
I want to be alone with my essential sea…  I don’t want to speak for a long time,  Silence! I want to learn,  
I want to know if I exist. 


Ch. 2: The Mental Challenge:  
Many sailors consider “shorthanded sailing” to  be comparable to “singlehanded sailing.” In my  view, having two people on the boat is no  different from having eight. The reason is not  because of the physical challenges. The reasons  are entirely because of the mental and emotional  challenges facing a singlehander that the crew of  a double handed or fully crewed boat will never  see. Mental challenges occur during even the  shortest trips. Emotional challenges can appear  on trips as short as eight hours, but more likely  after 12 hours or a day.  
The internet has become the best resource to  prove this point. Skippers in round the world  races are posting daily video to the web. These  videos show sailors who are physically, mentally  and emotionally exhausted from days without  adequate sleep. It is obvious that they are  working with significantly less than full mental  faculties. The pictures are completely different  from double handed or crewed boats, where  sleep is possible. Solo sailors are forced into  complex decision making processes at the very  time when they are least able to perform.  
Quoting from Ellen MacArthur’s incredible story  in “Taking on the World:”  
“It was more than just physical  exhaustion; it was causing more  pain inside than I had ever felt  before. I clenched my teeth and  threw my head down against the  hard, wet floor and wept. I  cried like a baby till I was so  numb with the cold that the pain  was dulled. Shivering and weak,  I crawled into the cabin and  slept in my waterproofs, curled  up in a ball in the footwell by  the engine.”  
From John Hughes’ “The Sailing Spirit:”  “The tears ran unabated down my  face as I watch Turtles, the boat  carrying my girlfriend, Vick, my  mother, and my close friends turn  
and scuttle back to the shelter  of Newport harbour. The image  of that parting will never leave  me. It came almost two hours  after the starting gun was fired  to signal the start of the BOC  race, two hours of beating to  windward that had left me  physically and emotionally  exhausted.”  
From the Singlehanded Transpac logs:  “Last thought for now: it is so  beautiful out here, I am finding  myself crying over every happy  memory I have with family and  friends. I don’t know why that’s  going on.”  
Another Transpac memory:  
“I spent two solid hours bawling  half way to Hawaii. Every sad  possibility crossed my mind.  “What was in the half-way package  that my wife gave me? Was it a  note that she was leaving me?  Was it a note that she was  dieing?” I knew that these were  both incredibly ridiculous  concepts, but I’d been alone for  more than a week with very little  sleep and no contact from home,  emotions can run wild.”  
From Adam Mayers’ “Sea of Dreams:”  “John Dennis turned fifty-eight  on the fleet’s third day back at  sea after the Bay of Biscay  storm. The boyish glee he’d felt  on leaving Newport was long gone  and he felt old, tired,  
depressed, and guilty about the  toll the trip was taking on his  family, something he had not  fully considered before he set  sail. He had expected to miss  them, but had not expected the  pangs of loneliness to outweigh  the pleasure of the journey.  Phone calls and e-mails became  painful stews of anticipation and  regret.” 

In a later chapter, when Dennis is forced to retire  from mechanical problems, Mayers continues:  “It was over; John Dennis was not  going to sail around the world.  “I’m so drained, I don’t have any  tears left”, he said, “It is a  dream and I know now I am never  going to achieve it. I’m  devastated.”  
As far as I know, singlehanded sailing is the only  sport where one needs to be physically, mentally  and emotionally ready, just to finish. I have  read many books on sailing the great races. I  have never read that the skipper of a Volvo  Ocean Race boat broke down and cried. It just  does not happen on a crewed boat. This is the  difference between singlehanding and crewing,  even with just two on board.  
Consider how rare it is in modern society for  someone to be totally alone and totally self  reliant. This does not mean reading a book with  a family member in the next room. This does  not mean sitting with a telephone or computer  nearby, ready to electronically communicate.  Being totally alone means the sailor must rely  completely on his own abilities with no recourse  to any assistance from any other person.  
Some might counter that with radio, cell phone  or satellite phone a singlehander is never alone  and can always call for assistance. This is true in  the long term, but has no standing for the  hundreds of things that do go awry and require  immediate resolution. A VHF serves no purpose  when a boat is broached and the cockpit is half  full of water. A cell phone won’t help with  strong winds and a lee shore. A single side band  radio cannot unwrap a spinnaker.  
In one race with a 20 knot wind, I wrapped my  spinnaker around the forestay attempting a gybe.  I was about 3 minutes from the rocks, but  because of the spinnaker half out, could not turn  up. I went to the bow and got the chute down  with about 30 seconds to spare. After the race,  the skipper of a crewed boat told me that they  
were just about to come to my aid when I got the  mess sorted. I could only ask him “What were  you going to do?” My actions alone were the  only possible source of a solution to the problem.  If I couldn’t do it, the boat was lost.  
The singlehanded sailor must understand that he  is completely, 100% self reliant. It is up to him  alone to solve every situation that he faces,  whether it be a simple knotted line or a life  threatening danger. I believe that this is why we  are rare. One only needs to look at a single/  double handed race, regardless of it being a two  hour club event or a professional around the  world adventure. There will be ten double  handed boats for every singlehander. The reason  is not that the double handers are physically  incapable of sailing their boat alone. The reason  is that only the singlehanders are willing to take  on the challenge of 100% self reliance. This can  be a very uncomfortable position. It is such a  rare situation that most people will never face it.  
Stress and Coping  
Several studies have concentrated on the specific  stresses of long distance, singlehanded sailing.  
“Medical and psychological problems in the  1972 singlehanded transatlantic yacht race” Glin  Bennet, The Lancet 2, 1973.  
Bennet performed an in-depth, real time study of  thirty-four competitors in the Observer  Transatlantic race. Each competitor was  designated by a letter A-Z.  
Sailing in general is an  
exhilarating activity most of the  time. However, when a man has to  spend hours on end at the helm,  is cold, soaked through, seasick,  hungry, uncertain about his  ability to handle the boat in all  conditions, and does not know his  position, he is liable to make  mistakes observing lights and  landmarks, reading his charts,  and planning rational courses of 

action. This is borne out by  numerous personal accounts  reported to me, and is in line  with experimental work on the  effects of fatigue on  
performance.  
Visual Experiences:  
R reported on day 10: “Spots…  before.. my eyes when looking at  the sky. I feel my tactics in  staying south and east so long  may have backfired with this  weather and more or less put me  out of the competitive race.” He  was sleeping adequately but  feeling tense and physically  uncomfortable. On day 26 “spots  before my eyes again. Not  serious and only occasional… I  think I’ve been spoiled by all  that calm weather. Conditions  have not been all that rough but  I’m really exhausted”.  
Day 35: “usual spots before eyes  when tired. Three days of gales  and storms. Very miserable.  Poor progress.” He had little  sleep during this period, made  errors in navigation and sail  handling: a tape recording made  at the time records his distress  and despair in the most poignant  fashion.  
T was setting his twin foresails  for the first time in the race at  about noon on day 33 in good  visibility when he saw an object  in the water. “A baby elephant”,  he thought: “A funny place to put  a baby elephant.” A little  later, looking at the same  object: “A funny place to put a  Ford Popular.” He accepted these  observations without question  until on closer inspection he  realized that the object was a  whale. This occurred 3 days  before arrival, and he was  feeling alert, only trying out a  maneuver for the first time.  
Much more complex visual  
experiences were reported in the  qualifying trip. K had been  continuously at the helm for 56  hours because of bad conditions,  and was making do with only  occasional snacks. He saw his  father-in-law at the top of the  mast. They were aware of one  another’s presence, and the  experience was in no way  
alarming.  
Sailing his 52ft trimaran up from  the Bay of Biscay around Ushant,  A could not put into any harbour  west of St. Malo, and because of  the treacherous coast and the  shipping he could get little  rest. Further he had only 1  day’s food remaining, to last for  6 days. He was lying on his bunk  when he heard a man putting the  boat about on to the other tack.  He had “seen” nothing at that  point, but when he went up on  deck to investigate the man  passed him in the passageway  coming down as he went up. The  boat had indeed been put about  and was on the correct course.  
Amongst singlehanders the  difference between sleeping and  waking was often blurred even  when apparently well rested, so  what was a premonition while  awake and what was a dream  dreamed in sleep was hard to  diminish.  
What is striking is the frequency  and range of the psychological  phenomena reported. Taken out  of context they might be said to  provide evidence of severe mental  disorder, but what is their  significance in context? Is  there something special about the  business of singlehanded sailing  that makes such phenomena common,  or are they due to some  
peculiarity in the sailors  themselves? 

Experimental work on sensory  deprivation and sleep deprivation  shows that gross disorders of  perception and thinking processes  can be produced quite reliably.  Further, these reactions are more  likely if the subject is fatigued  or anxious. The sustained  exposure to the elements, the  seasickness, and lack of  
nourishment certainly contribute  to the development of fatigue.  Sensory deprivation also  
occurred, but mainly in the form  of seduced patterning. The whine  of wind in the rigging, the  steady noise of the waves, the  lack of anything on the surface  of the sea or in the sky,  especially in foggy conditions,  all reduce the sensory input and  increase the likelihood of the  development of visual and  auditory experience from within.  
Published accounts of perceptual  disturbances which would lead the  subject to disaster suggest that  insight generally prevents total  destruction. For instance, a  very weary sailor on another  occasion was close to the Belgian  coast and saw two men on the  shore beckoning him and pointing  to the harbour entrance. He did  not go in for some reason but  anchored offshore. In the  morning he woke after a long  sleep to find only rocks along  that stretch of coast. On the  other hand one is not likely to  have many records from the very  fatigued whose insight was  totally suspended.  
It is hoped that those who have  to maintain a high level of  function in adverse physical  conditions will come to recognize  the subtle ways fatigue can place  them at risk and take measures to  protect themselves.  
Hallucinations are fairly common among  singlehanders. This is a predictable byproduct of  lack of sleep and an unfamiliar environment.  During the Singlehanded Transpac, I climbed on  deck in the middle of the night to find three men  crouched at the bow as I sailed down a river in  Germany. They were ignoring my commands.  After a couple of minutes I sat down in the  cockpit and realized that something was wrong.  I gained hold of my senses and thought “wow,  that must be an hallucination.”  
In the 2002 Transpac, Mark Deppe reported:  
I had my first set of lucid  dreams in awhile last night. A  lucid dream is unlike any normal  kind of dream. It is so vivid and  detailed that it is very close to  being awake. But the most  interesting aspect is that the  dreamer is aware that he is  dreaming, and can control how the  dream develops.  
I've only experienced lucid  dreams a handful of times, and  most always on a boat or ship  after a week or so. In my case,  being extremely fatigued helps  initiate the special conditions  required to enter the lucid  state, since you must remain  aware of the fact you are  dreaming without actually waking  up. It's a very fine line. The  dream rivals reality in how  detailed and lifelike it is. My  favorite thing to do while lucid  dreaming is to fly. Since I can  control any aspect of the dream,  I can move my body about freely  without any of the normal  constraints of gravity. Fun  stuff.  
Hearing Voices: While crossing the Pacific, I  heard distinct voices inside the boat. It sounded  like a group of people having a conversation in a  foreign language, as if over a radio broadcast. I  have never had this experience with short 


voyages, so it is not simply because of water on  the hull. Fatigue must play a roll.  
This is a very common phenomena on long  distance voyages, as indicated by Mark Deppe  aboard the J-120 Alchera in the 2008 Transpac  logs:  
I've started hearing voices  again. Seems to happen every  Transpac at some point. I could  swear there's a radio with a talk  show tuned in located somewhere  in the forward berth under the  spinnaker I have spread out  drying from the last dunking it  took. And in the sound of the  water going by outside the hull I  hear what sounds like party  conversations going on very  faintly.  
In 2002 Mark reported:  
Got to go, it sounds like there's  an argument going on in the  forward berth, and someone else  is knocking on the outside of the  hull for attention. There's  another voice that keeps saying  'Got Milk?' 'Got Milk?' over and  over again, I wish it would get  it's milk and shut up.  
Al Hughes on the Open 60 Dogbark reported the  same:  
Dogbark has had a relatively slow  trip for her so far but the  skipper is showing signs of  cracking. I remember this from  the first trip, I start hearing  things, like a radio playing or  voices in the background. After a  while you can start talking to  them, strange but true. I guess  it is a little bit of sleep  deprivation, near constant stress  and limited contact with others,  sound like the solo sailors  lament or dream depending.  
I know of one skipper who searched his boat for  stowaways during the 2006 Transpac.  
“Psychological breakdown at sea: hazards of  singlehanded ocean sailing,” Glin Bennet,  British Journal of medical Psychology, 47, 1974.  In his second study, Bennet carefully analyzed  the stresses faced by Donald Crowhurst in his ill  fated attempt at the first round the world race,  based on the research in the book “The Strange  Last Voyage of Donald Crowhurst” by Nicholas  Tomalin and Ron Hall: 1970.  
“It is perhaps the most  
completely documented account of  a psychological breakdown.”  
His speculative writings begin  proper off the southern part of  South America while he is waiting  to “re-enter” the race. He  becomes aware of the tremendous  reception awaiting him, the  B.B.C. coming out to meet him,  and he finally retreats from  reality altogether. Until the  last few days of course he is  sailing his boat competently and  navigating with adequate  
precision, and later when he was  apparently totally preoccupied  with his thoughts he was able to  send messages in morse concerning  his arrival home. These are all  relatively complex tasks which  one might not expect of someone  as detached from reality as  presumably Crowhurst was. Or  does it mean that someone  apparently absorbed with their  own thoughts does have a greater  ability to switch back into  contact than is generally  supposed?  
On the whole, the evidence points  to a breakdown in the face of an  utterly impossible situation: a  tumultuous homecoming with  national television and radio  coverage as the winner of a  unique contest, through a  deception that was certain to be  discovered. The disgrace would  be bigger enough for anyone to  bear, but for Donald Crowhurst 


this was to have been the  triumphal moment of a life that  until now had been marked by many  false starts and failures. This  success had possibly been  achieved in his mind from the  moment he first thought of  circumnavigation. The realities  of the voyage had proved too much  for him, and when after the first  fortnight of the voyage success  seemed to be slipping out of  reach, he began to manipulate he  realities until he had adjusted  the world to match his  
requirements. Then in his mind  he gained mastery over the world,  over the universe, over god,  until there was no longer any  point in remaining in the world  which most people regard as real.  
One of the functions of tragedy  in the theatre is to present an  intensified view of ordinary  life. With the story of Donald  Crowhurst we have such a story  but, alas, one that is true. The  crisis and the breakdown occurred  on the high seas, but the steps  which led to it in the first  place and the remorseless way in  which he became more firmly  caught in the trap are clearly  discernible, and the parallels  with ordinary life are not hard  to find. Individuals will make  their own interpretations, but  one powerful message that comes  through from this story is the  need to provide those in distress  with the opportunity to express  their real feelings when all  around them the barriers are  going up and the avenues of  escape are closing. 
Read the 2nd half of the last paragraph one more  time, just to absorb it again.  
I strongly recommend that every singlehander  read “The Strange Last Voyage of Donald  Crowhurst” AND “The Long Way” by Bernard  
Moitessier. I have never seen an instance where  the line between genius and insanity was so fine.  
“Voluntary Solitude: Studies of men in a  singlehanded Transatlantic sailing race”, H.E.  Lewis, J.M. Harris, D.H. Lewis, C.  
deMonchhaux, The Lancet 1, 1964  
This was a detailed real time study of the  participants in a 1960 race from Plymouth,  England to New York, USA.  
 The men have certain features of  reported mood pattern in common.  On the whole they tended  
consistently to be calm and  relaxed rather than irritable and  excitable, to feel keen to do  well rather than regretful at  having started, and to be  confident rather than scared.  
There is even more resemblance  among the men in the pattern of  interrelation between their moods  than there is in the mood profile  itself. Thus the positively  toned emotions tended  
consistently to occur together,  and likewise the negatively toned  ones. Calmness, relaxation,  self-sufficiency, keenness,  confidence and physical freshness  were closely related to each  other in all the records, and  conversely excitability,  
irritability, tension, boredom,  loneliness, exhaustion and fear  waxed and waned together.  
“Stress and Coping in Single-Handed Round the-World Ocean Sailing” Neil J.V. Weston, et.  al: University of Portsmouth, UK. Journal of  Applied Sport Psychology. 21 – 2009  
Weston performed a detailed psychological  assessment of five single-handed sailors entered  into the 2006/2007 Velux 5 Oceans round-the world race. 


All skippers stated that poor  yacht performance as a result of  light winds was one of the most  difficult stressors to deal with.  Although much of the respon sibility for the poor progress  lay outside their control,  skippers would spend a lot of  time and energy trying to find  wind and get the yacht moving.  These efforts would subsequently  result in less sleep, greater  physical exhaustion, emotional  instability.  
As discussed above, singlehanders do not face  their greatest stress in storms, but rather in  calms. I believe that this study is applicable:  David Maister, “The psychology of waiting  lines” 1985  
Uncertain Waits Are Longer than  Known, Finite Waits: The most  profound source of anxiety in  waiting is how long the wait will  be. For example, if a patient in  a waiting room is told that the  doctor will be delayed thirty  minutes, he experiences an  initial annoyance but then  relaxes into an acceptance of the  inevitability of the wait.  However, if the patient is told  the doctor will be free soon, he  spends the whole time in a state  of nervous anticipation, unable  to settle down, afraid to depart  and come back. The patient’s  expectations are being managed  poorly.  
A good example of the role of  uncertainty in the waiting  experience is provided by the  “appointment syndrome.” Clients  who arrive early for an  
appointment will sit contentedly  until the scheduled time, even if  this is a significant amount of  time in an absolute sense (say,  thirty minutes). However, once  the appointment time is passed,  even a short wait of, say, ten  
minutes, grows increasingly  annoying. The wait until the  appointed time is finite; waiting  beyond the point has no knowable  limit.  
Solo Waits Feel Longer than Group  Waits: One of the remarkable  syndromes to observe in waiting  lines is to see individuals  sitting or standing next to each  other without talking or  
otherwise interacting until an  announcement of a delay is made.  Then the individuals suddenly  turn to each other to express  their exasperation, wonder  collectively what is happening,  and console each other. What this  illustrates is that there is some  form of comfort in group waiting  rather than waiting alone.  
The most successful predator  introduced to hunt down  
unproductive and anxiety producing wait times has been the  Blackberry. Aptly dubbed the  "Crackberry" by some, this device  lets people be productive in the  most naturally unproductive  locations, like waiting in line.  I guess this would apply to text  messaging on phones or other  things that can be done silently  in lines.  
The above studies prove that calms of  indeterminate length cause the greatest stress to  singlehanders. With a crew there are others to  talk and joke with. By oneself there is nothing  that can be done to improve the situation. A  simple, inexpensive handheld video game might  be the best solution to this problem. A small  game of Tetris will keep one occupied for hours.  
Weston provided the following as stress coping  mechanisms from their study:  
Using social support (e.g., team,  family, friends, supporters,  organizers) enabled skippers to  deal with the difficult 

environmental conditions,  isolation, and possible threat  stressors. Anshel (1996)  suggested that such emotion focused coping approaches are  more likely under low perceived  controllability situations.  Nevertheless, although the  present findings provide partial  support for this assertion, the  skippers also employed other  problem – (e.g., staying calm),  appraisal – (e.g. rationalizing  the situation), and approach –  focusing efforts on controllable  factors) focused coping to deal  with these uncontrollable  environmental stressors.  
Boredom: 
Surprisingly, boredom can set in even when  sailing conditions are perfect and the boat is  moving at top speed. I was very bored in the  steady trade winds a few days out of Hawaii.  The boat was steering itself perfectly. There  
were no steps that I could take to increase  performance, so I had nothing to do. During an  afternoon radio chat, one of the other skippers  mirrored my thoughts exactly when he  commented, “I never expected to be so bored.”  
A skipper is advised to bring numerous books on  any voyage. Modern society does not train us  on how to sit still and do nothing. It is much  more difficult than most people desire.  
I have found tremendous relief by listening to  audio books. The website www.librivox.org  contains thousands of classic books in the public  domain and free to download. I will never have  a chance to actually read massive volumes such  as the 1,946 pages in 135 chapters of Moby  Dick. But I was very happy to listen to it over  24 hours, 37 minutes. Another fascinating book  was “The Eventful History of the Mutiny and  Piratical Seizure of H.M.S. Bounty: Its Causes  and Consequences” running ten and a half hours.  Both of these go well beyond anything we have  seen in the movies. Virtually all of the classic  
novels are represented at librivox.org and  skippers will find them welcome friends on long  voyages.  
Emotional Inertia:  
“Fear Paralysis” is a well understood phenomena  where a person is in such fear that they are  unable to move. I know of one sailor who  experienced this during the famous Fastnet  storm. He was so paralyzed that his crew moved  him below, where he simply curled up on the  bunk for the duration of the storm.  
I have developed a different theory that seems to  be applicable to singlehanded sailors or others  who perform dangerous tasks alone. This theory  is based on my own experience and what I have  seen from others. “Emotional inertia” occurs in  a highly stressful situation in unfamiliar  circumstances. The result of the inertia is that  the singlehander continues to actively sail on his  present course and hope for the best, even though  the course will lead to certain doom, rather than  take the potentially dangerous action required to  resolve the situation.  
There are three keys to recognize in this  situation. First is that the singlehander continues  to actively sail the boat, trim the sails and steer  on the present course.  
Second, the present course will lead to certain  doom. That is, there is no question that (at least  in the skipper’s mind) the course will lead to a  very bad, dangerous or even life threatening  situation. Sailing into a rock, loosing the rig, etc.  are perfect examples of this type of situation.  
Third, the skipper is unwilling to take whatever  action is necessary to rectify the situation  because he is afraid of the danger of that action.  He simply “hopes for the best.” In some cases  the required action will be extreme, but in  foresight it is still preferable to the doom faced  on the existing course. Note that I said “in 

foresight.” What matters is that the skipper  perceives that doom is certain.  
The best example is a boat heading for rocks in  high winds. The only way to avoid the rocks is  by gybing, but this action will bring the boat  even closer to the rocks before sailing clear. The  skipper must make an immediate choice between  the certainty of hitting the rocks in three minutes,  or gybing and with the potential of hitting the  rocks immediately or hopefully sailing clear.  But the skipper faces emotional inertia. He is  unable to make the choice to gybe, so sails on to  his doom on the rocks.  
I’ve included this concept because if one is  aware of the concept of emotional inertia, he will  be able to avoid it. When facing this type of  dilemma, the skipper should think for a moment  “this must be that emotional inertia problem. I  should snap out of it and do something!”  
I have faced the rocks dilemma twice in my  sailing career. The first time I was unwilling to  gybe and ran on the rocks. After developing the  theory of emotional inertia, the second time I  was aware of the dilemma and did an immediate  gybe and sailed clear.  
As one becomes more skilled, the starting point  for emotional inertia moves further out on the  scale, but it is still in effect. Here are two  examples of highly skilled sailing experts. I  believe that they faced it in what can only be  described as the most extreme circumstances.  
I believe that Derek Hatfield faced emotional  inertia approaching Cape Horn, as described in  the book “Sea Of Dreams,” by Adam Mayers:  As dawn broke on Friday, March 7,  Hatfield saw a red light winking  ahead to his right, about two and  a half miles away. He had been  at the helm for almost twenty four hours and was so exhausted  he could barely think, so he was  not able to comprehend  
immediately what his eyes were  
telling him. As the realization  sank in, fear squeezed the breath  from his lungs. He would later  say this moment was the most  terrifying in his life. “It  still makes me shiver thinking  about it,” he says.  
Hatfield knew he was looking at  the glow of a lighthouse. But if  this was the Horn, the lighthouse  should be on his left, not his  right. If it was the Horn, it  meant he was driving towards  assured destruction, for to the  left there could only be the  jagged shards of volcanic rock.  Driven by hurricane force winds,  he would be dead very quickly,  joining the thousands of others  who had perished here.  
… Over the next fifteen to twenty  minutes, the red circle of light  drew closer as Spirit of Canada  surfed barepoled towards its  fate. The light transfixed  Hatfield, and he wondered whether  these were his last moments on  earth. He tried to change course  and sail towards the light in the  hope that as he got closer he  would be able to see it more  clearly and manoeuvre around it.  But try as he might, he couldn’t  do it. This wind and wave  combination was such that as he  altered his course the waves  threatened to capsize his boat.  When collision seemed certain,  the light slip by and receded  into the night. … He had passed  the Diego Ramirez Islands, a  small chain of rocky outcrops …  thirty miles west of the horn.  
I believe that Pete Goss was facing emotional  inertia, as described in his fantastic book “Close  to the Wind.”  
An hour later the wind suddenly  increased… up to forty knots… I  would never be able to reduce  sail in time – the boat was on  edge and it would be too much to 

ask the autopilot. …The front  two thirds of the boat was out of  the water, the bow was up and she  was touching twenty-seven knots  as the gusts swept in from  nowhere….What a prat! I was  trapped by my own stupidity. She  was over canvassed and yet there  was no way I could put the boat  back on autopilot so that I could  go forward and reduce sail. All  I could do was helm and hope for  the best. (Note that I had written the  “hope for the best” line in my emotional inertia  theory prior to reading Goss’s account.) …whatever happened now I must  keep clear of the runner – the  rig was going to go for sure.  
A few hours later Goss’s boat did a Chinese  gybe and broached, pinning the mast to the  water. Luckily the rig survived, but the  spinnaker was destroyed. Continuing the story:  I was determined to make the most  of the experience. As the last  tatter of spinnaker disappeared  into the hatch - £4,500 down the  drain, I decided I wouldn’t be so  stupid again.  
Given the very high probability of loosing the rig  under these conditions (certain doom), it might  have been better to take some other action while  reducing sail in a somewhat orderly manner, but  Goss “hoped for the best.”  
I can only think of a person being led to the  firing squad. Any action, any action at all, is  preferable to this certain doom. Contrary to what  the movies show, there is no dignity in being  shot. When we are alone on a boat, we don’t  even need to consider how an action might look  to others.  
I believe that the problem is less likely on  crewed boats because at least one member of the  crew will step up to make the necessary  suggestion and lead to a decision. It is the type  of situation where the singlehander should slap  himself across the face and “snap out of it!” 
Sleep  
Sleep is one of the most discussed topics in  singlehanding. Most of us can stay awake 24 or  36 hours on a short voyage, but for anything  longer, sleep is a necessity.  
For the beginning singlehander, going below  decks itself can be a challenge. We have grown  accustomed to driving a car, where we don’t take  our eyes off the road for more than 3 seconds.  How could we possibly sleep while the boat  continues to move?  
I suggest that the new singlehander practice  during short afternoon trips, when there is really  no reason at all. He or she should go below for 5  minutes at a time to perform a specific task, like  checking the charts, making coffee or practicing  knots. They must resist the urge to stick his head  on deck for at least 5 minutes. After a few days  of this, the time below deck can be increased to  20 minutes while they cook an entire meal – and  eat it. I suggest that they do not use any  electronic monitoring during this period. Turn  off the radar, AIS or SeaMe. It takes a person  time to become accustomed to sailing on faith  alone for 20 minutes, but it must be done.  Electronic monitoring aids are just that – aids.  They must not become crutches and must not  supplant the skipper’s instincts.  
One piece of advice is that if the skipper can hear  the motor of a ship, he should look around.  Whales may be able to hear ships 50 miles away.  Humans can only hear ships ½ mile away.  
Once the skipper has become accustomed to 20  minutes below, a duration when he could have  run into any number of floating debris, the idea  
of spending an hour or more without looking  around becomes less stressful. At this point the  electronics can be reactivated. It has long been  held that it will take 20 minutes for a ship to  cross the horizon and hit a sailboat. So this is as  long as one should sail on faith alone. 

Approaches to sleep:  
It is well known that a person can not “store”  sleep in a bank to use at a later date. However, it  is highly advisable to get the most sleep possible  for two nights before a voyage so that the  singlehander is well rested as he leaves the dock.  Studies have shown that athletic performance is  determined more by the sleep taken two days,  rather than one day, in advance of the event.  Based on this, I make sure to get at least two  very good nights of sleep before any voyage.  This means that I will not drink any alcohol for  these days (alcohol keeps me awake); I get to  bed early (I am a “lark” type sleeper); and I will  even take a sleeping pill so that I sleep soundly  all through the night. I make sure that my boat is  fully prepared two days in advance to reduce  stress and definitely avoid the pre-race parties  that most sailors attend.  
I know that adrenalin will stop me from sleeping  for the first night when I will probably be in a  high traffic area anyway. Starting the voyage  well rested ensures that missing one night of  sleep is not debilitating.  
Once underway, a common method of keeping  watch is to get out of the bunk every 20-30  minutes and take a quick look around the horizon  and at the compass, then go back to sleep again.  The idea is to get back to the bunk before being  completely awake, so that it is easy to fall back  into deep sleep. This is much like a normal  person waking in the middle of the night to  urinate, then climbing back into bed and back to  sleep. With this technique, the skipper is not  intending to work the boat at all, simply check  for hazards. I use this technique and Derek  Hatfield used it in the 2002 Around Alone; he set  an alarm twenty minutes. He would wake up,  check around the boat and go back to sleep for  another twenty minutes. After a few days he  found the alarm unnecessary.  
I use three tips to make this technique workable.  First, I find that getting out of, and back into, a  
sleeping bag in my cramped bunk below deck is  too much of an effort. It takes too long and has a  tendency to bring me fully awake. I have set up  a sitting  
hammock in  
the cockpit,  
made from a  
sail bag. This  
is a very  
comfortable  
place for me to  
sleep, facing  
backwards  
with my head  
against the  
main hatchway  
and my bum  
just slightly  
above the  
cockpit sole. In this position I barely need to  move to look all around the horizon. I can also  reach the autopilot and all three sheets to make  small adjustments if necessary. Modern  singlehanded racing boats have built cockpit  houses to cover the skipper next to the hatchway  for the same purpose. I have taken voyages of  up to five days sleeping only in my hammock.  
Second, I have a small kitchen alarm clipped to  my harness. It is important that the alarm  automatically resets to twenty minutes after each  activation. If it takes concentration to reset the  alarm, once again it wakes me too much.  
Third, eliminate electronics that might wake me  unnecessarily. The ocean is a really big place. I  don’t care if a ship passes 20 miles away or even  
5 miles away. I only want to know if a ship is  passing less than 1 mile away. Radar and AIS  alarms should be set for the skipper’s own level  of comfort. This also refers to the autopilot  “wind shift alarm”. My autopilot has a built in  15º wind shift alarm that can not be adjusted. I  have found this to be too tight a range. On a  gusty run, the wind will shift back and forth by  15º many times overnight. All of these  electronic alarms will not only wake the skipper, 

but keep him nervously on-guard, waiting for the  next alarm. This problem led to hallucinations  during the 2006 Singlehanded Transpac. I have  disconnected the wind shift alarm altogether.  
Polyphasic sleep:  
Dr. Claudio Stampi is considered the world’s  greatest expert on “Polyphasic Sleep” for  singlehanded sailors. Through his  
“Chronobiology Research Institute” He has  lectured many times on this topic and his  methodology is often used by top performing  racers. The two basic ideas behind this  technique are reducing the total time sleeping  each day from a normal 8 hours to 5 hours or  less, and to sleep in short naps with productive  time in-between each nap. (NOTE: It is  important that the skipper read this entire  section, including the rebuttal to Stampi’s  techniques. Hallucinations are a wonderful  thing!)  
Here is an exerpt from “MacAuthur is caught not  napping.” The Sunday Times, January 20, 2005:  
THE ocean never sleeps and nor  does Ellen MacArthur. At least,  that is how it seems during her  race to become the fastest sailor  to circumnavigate the world  single-handed. … Sleep  
represents something of a Catch 22; she knows that she must sleep  in order to achieve the mental  and physical condition to keep  making good time but that each  time she does, she is losing  time.  
MacArthur wears a monitoring  device on her arm and the data is  sent to Boston to be analysed by  Claudio Stampi, the chrono biologist with whom she has  worked for the past five years.  
From the start, on November 30,  until January 12, she averaged  5.54 hours sleep a day. But from  
January 6 to the 12th, MacArthur  averaged just 3.9 hours. “Under  normal circumstances this would  already represent quite a  sacrificed sleep allowance in  comparison to the two-week  transatlantic race in 2000, where  Ellen averaged 4.2 hours per  day,” Stampi said. “But this low  sleep quota will have an even  more dramatic impact on someone  who is particularly fatigued  having been at sea for 50 days.”  
MacArthur’s sleep patterns are  usually feverish, mostly divided  into ten or 20 minutes, but  napping is one of her strategies.  According to Stampi, for the 94  days of the Vendée Globe in 2000- 01, MacArthur averaged 5.7 hours  sleep a day, divided into nine  naps. “When you have to go from  an average of 7½ hours a day to  Ellen’s average of 5½,” Stampi  said, “we have seen from many  experiments that it is actually  better to divide those fewer  hours into multiple naps.” …  
Another of Stampi’s suggestions  is the “Sunday Strategy; that is  the strategy of once a week,  declaring a different day — like  a vacation day, or half-day”,  Stampi said. “That is both  psychologically as well as from a  sleep perspective. Sleep seems to  be extremely plastic. One day is  enough to put you back to a very  good level.  
“Ellen, from a sleep physiology  perspective, is a normal person.  Where she is exceptional is in  her drive and discipline. You  will never find a day without  sleep with Ellen. Not every  sailor can do that. Some will  stay a day, two, sometimes three,  without sleep at all. The  benefits of even a short nap are  disproportionate to the  
duration.” 

According to Adam Mayers in “Sea of Dreams,”  Brad Van Liew used this technique in the 2002  Around Alone. Brad had taken part in a sleep  study at Harvard University Medical School,  where he learned that he could operate in the  eightieth percentile of alertness with just 4 ½  hours of sleep. During the race he had a 45  minute sleep every four hours.  
Dr. Stampi teaches sailors how to perform best  on minimal sleep. The secret is learning how to  power-nap (pulling an Einstein) His research was  done by base testing cognitive performance with  a normal eight hour sleep. Then he had subjects  shift to three-hour routines. A month later, the  group that had one long sleep of 3 hours showed  a 30 percent loss in cognitive performance. The  group that divided its sleep between nighttime  and short naps showed a 25 percent drop. But the  polyphasic group, which slept exclusively in  short naps, showed only a 12 percent drop.  
Stampi divides sleep into REM (important for  memory and learning) and non-REM (restores  energy). Non-REM sleep itself has four stages:  one, light slumber; two, the onset of real sleep,  (heart rate and breathing slow); three and four,  
deep (slow-brainwave) sleep that is most  restorative.  
Sleepers follow a 90 minute cycle through these  stages with REM between each cycle. Under this  theory, the body needs slow-wave sleep first and  achieves this in the first three hours. If only four  
hours of sleep are possible, the body will still  achieve 95% of slow-wave sleep while missing  most of the REM and stage-two sleep.  
This suggests that slow-wave sleep is the most  critical. That sleep is more valuable at the  beginning of the sleep cycle than at the end. So  if a singlehander takes more naps he is  recharging more efficiently than he would be  with a single longer sleep.  
Stampi notes that a skipper must nap wisely by  tailoring times and lengths to the body’s  
particular requirements. For example sleep  peaks normally occur in mid-afternoon and early  morning, but it is not desirable to sleep in the  early evening. This made scientific sense:  Humans tend to feel sleep pressure at those  times.  
His research showed that afternoon naps had the  most valuable slow-wave sleep, important for  recharging the body. Sailors should try to get at  least some of their quota then. The skipper  should try to get his body “in phase” and cycle  accordingly, so that no time is wasted simply  laying in the bunk with eyes wide open.    
According to the testing, there are two types of  people: morning people, or "larks," and evening  people, or "owls." Larks are good at taking short  naps but are not as efficient at night, and prefer a  regular routine. Owls appear to cope better with  irregular schedules, but prefer longer naps. For  example, Ellen MacArthur is a lark and tends to  spend 60 percent of her sleep in naps of less than  an hour. Mike Golding, on the other hand, is an  owl. Only 23 percent of his sleep time was  devoted to naps of less than an hour. But both  sleep about the same amount while racing,  between 4.5 and 5.5 hours on average.  
An excellent video on Claudio Stampi and  polyphasic sleep is available on Youtube.com.  Search for “Polyphasic sleep study”  
It is difficult to jump into polyphasic sleep on the  first day of a long voyage. Here are some  techniques for adapting to a polyphasic sleeping  schedule, adapted from  
www.sleepingschedules.com:  
• Determine a personal circadian cycle, i.e.  when the body wants to sleep and when it  wants to be active. Every person has his  own, individual circadian rhythm with peaks  and dips in alertness, when they normally fall  asleep and when they normally wake. It  forms the basis of sleep times in the  
polyphasic system. As mentioned above, 

most people are designated as Larks and  Owls.  
• Staged transition: Some have found that  staging the transition over three to nine days  helps with success adapting. Start with one  (shorter than usual) core sleep at night and  one afternoon nap. Move to two sleeps at  night separated by a task, along with the  afternoon nap. Increase to three sleeps, etc,  depending on Lark or Owl status.  
• “Core Sleep” is the one longer sleep each 24- hours. Most researchers suggest that this be  when the skipper normally goes to sleep. For  example, I (a lark) normally go to bed at  10pm, and can fall asleep in just a few  minutes.  
• Use an alarm to wake up. The skipper  should never sleep past the alarm.  
• Turn on a bright light to activate the body  when waking. This simulates morning. Get  out of the bunk immediately. Do not stay in  the bunk and daydream, even if awake.  
• Do not attempt to sleep between 6pm and  8pm. Stampi refers to this as the “forbidden  zone.” He suggests that our ancient  
ancestors used this period to ensure safety  before sleeping, so it is instinctive that we  not sleep during this period.  
• Avoid caffeine before scheduled sleep. It is  important not to miss a sleep period if it will  lead to reduced performance later.  
The polyphasic approach does have critics. The  US military has studied fatigue countermeasures:  Each individual nap should be  long enough to provide at least  45 continuous minutes of sleep,  although longer naps (2 hours)  are better. In general, the  shorter each individual nap is,  the more frequent the naps should  be. The objective remains to  
acquire a daily total of 8 hours  of sleep.  
The Canadian Marine Pilot’s trainer’s handbook:  Under extreme circumstances where  sleep cannot be achieved  
continuously, research on napping  shows that 10- to 20-minute naps  at regular intervals during the  day can help relieve some of the  sleep deprivation and thus  maintain minimum levels of  performance for several days.  However, researchers caution that  levels of performance achieved  using short naps to temporarily  replace normal sleep, are always  well below that achieved when  fully rested.  
Dr. Piotr Wozniak has studied the subject and  does not believe it is possible to perform  adequately using these techniques. An excellent  counter view is expressed in a video on  Youtube.com. Search for: “Polyphasic Sleep  Experiment,” where the best line is “I can’t tell if  I’ve been getting sleep or not. I don’t know. I  might be. I’ve got memory gaps. I want some  pancakes.”  
The following is excerpted from  
http://ftp.supermemo.com/articles/polyphasic.htm The theory behind the polyphasic  sleep is that with some effort,  we can entrain our brain to sleep  along the ancient polyphasic  cycle and gain lots of waking  time on the way, mostly by  shedding the lesser important  stages of sleep.  
EEG measurements indicate that  humans are basically biphasic.  There is a single powerful drive  to sleep during the night, and a  single dip in alertness in the  middle of the day. The cycle can  be prodded and shifted slightly  on a daily basis. The degree of  the shift requires a precise  timing of the phase-shifting  stimulus. In other words, with a 

stimulus such as light, physical  activity, or social interaction,  we can move the period of maximum  sleepiness slightly. Although the  precise measurements speak of the  possible shift of up to 3 hours  in a single day with a single  strong stimulus, it is hard, in  practice, to shift one's  
circadian rhythm by more than 1  hour per day.  
An increasing portion of the  population use the alarm clock to  do the job that should naturally  by done by sunlight. This is not  a healthy solution and is usually  forced by our electrically-lit  lifestyle with evening TV,  evening reading, evening  
Internet, evening partying, etc.  The well-defined effects of  natural sleep affecting stimuli  on sleep patterns lead to an  instant conclusion: the claim  that humans can adapt to any  sleeping pattern is false. A  sudden shift in the schedule, as  in shift work, may lead to a  catastrophic disruption of sleep  control mechanisms.  
 It appears that polyphasic sleep  encounters the precisely same  problems as seen in jet lag or  shift-work. The human body clock  is not adapted to sleeping in  patterns other than monophasic or  biphasic sleep. In other words,  the only known healthy  
alternatives are: (1) a single 6- 8 hours sleep block in the night,  or (2) a night sleep of 5-7 hours  combined with a 15-90 min. siesta  nap.  
Through sleep deprivation,  polyphasic sleepers can increase  the number of naps during the day  to three. However, the pattern of  one night sleep and three daily  naps in highly unstable and can  be maintained only with a never 
ending degree of sleep  
deprivation.  
The above findings lead to a  conclusion that it is not  possible to maintain a polyphasic  sleep schedule and retain high  alertness and/or creativity!  The answer to the question "to  sleep or not to sleep  
polyphasically" will depend on  your goals and your chosen  criteria. You may want to sleep  polyphasically if you want to  maximize the frequency of a  waking activity (e.g. monitoring  the instruments and the horizon  in solo yacht racing). Yet you  will definitely not want to sleep  polyphasically if: you want to  maximize creative output,  alertness or health. Only when  approaching substantial sleep  deprivation can polyphasic  schedule be superior to biphasic  schedule in that respect.  
Stampi's methods are primarily  targeted at minimizing sleep  deprivation. When speaking about  Ellen MacArthur, he puts his  research in a nutshell: "What  Ellen is doing is finding the  best compromise between her need  to sleep and her need to be awake  all the time". Stampi has shown  that polyphasic sleep can improve  cognitive performance in  
conditions of sleep deprivation  as compared with monophasic  sleep: Individuals sleeping for  30 minutes every four hours, for  a daily total of only 3 hours of  sleep, performed better and were  more alert, compared to when they  had 3 hours of uninterrupted  sleep. In other words, under  conditions of dramatic sleep  reduction, it is more efficient  to recharge the sleep "battery"  more often.  
With the above rebuttals in mind, it appears that  sleeping in short naps spaced throughout the day  is superior to a single sleep of just 3 hours but is 

still far less than ideal. A polyphasic sleeping  schedule was the best compromise between a  need to sleep and a need to be awake. But it is  nothing more than that. Given that the very  reason a singlehander would use this method is  to ensure that the boat remains in control, short  naps are what he would want and need anyway.  Under stressed conditions, he is unlikely to get 3  straight hours of sleep in any case.  
Space Filler: Here is a poem about my first long distance  race, singlehanded against crewed boats. I was on my  Tanzer 22 “Foolish Laughter” on Lac Deschene and the  Ottawa River. I was given two mementos for this race: the  first for hitting three different rocks; the second for being  “the keenest sailor in the race.”  
The Foolish 50 Miles with apologies to Robert Service  
There are strange things done ‘neath the moon and sun  By the men who ply the waves.  
Leaving wives at home they face the foam  
That will blow them to their graves.  
Lac Deschene has seen keen men  
But the keenest it ever did see  
Was the stalwart Captain of Foolish Laughter.  I know him, for that man is me.  
It was the ninth month of ought one,  
the day the fateful race started.  
I said to the wife “Oh, it'll be fun”  
As I kissed her and happily parted.  
With a promise of rain I raised genny and main  And headed out of the harbour.  
But the wind came up fast and struck hard at the mast  As I moved from port tack to the starboard.  
“Shorten sail!” yelled the Captain, “Aye Aye!” said the  Mate  
“We will do whatever we can!”  
But the die had been cast when the crew rushed the mast.  For the entire crew was only one man.  
The genny was doused and a reef in the main  When I first grounded on that lee shore.  
The impact was that of a slow moving train,  
And who knew that I'd do it twice more.  
I raised centre board up and the boat spun around  When I hit hard rock like a shot.  
With the meter destroyed how fast could I go?  I could no longer measure a knot.  
A long beat up river, under storm jib and main  I settled down to my course  
I had just poured black coffee, when it started to rain.  Oh Lord, could it get any worse.  
I raised number one on the down river run.  
At surfing the T doesn't fail.  
The sky grew quite dark when I rounded S Mark  And then came the crack of the hail.  
The wind gusted up to 48 knots  
And my heel reached 60 degrees.  
The jib came down fast, main sheet out to the last  As I waited for much calmer seas.  
Beating up the North shore, could I take any more  Of the wind and the cold and the hail?  
I poured my next cup, taking time to look up  And my gaff hook slipped over the rail.  
Many men have faced grief upon Blueberry Reef  And I was to join that fine crowd.  
It was more like a shudder, kicking c-board and rudder  The boat moaned, but not really out loud.  
Up river again as the darkness it came.  
I passed boats loaded with crew.  
“A great adventure!” I shouted, they laughed in return.  I still had so much left to do.  
Should I have chosen to stop when the genny went “POP”  And parted two feet from the head?  
I touched ground once more as I neared the South shore  Seeking shelter from the gusts that I dread.  
Pure joy made me shiver racing back down that river  And the moon and the stars did appear.  
It was 10:59 when I crossed the end line,  
And put away all of my fear.  
So what's to become of this brave, naive man.  Will my days be happy ever after?  
If you come near the lake bend an ear to the West.  On a clear night in a 10 knot breeze,  
You can just make out the sound,  
Of Foolish Laughter. 

Ch. 3: Boat design, selection and setup  What boat to look for:  
The best boat for singlehanding is the one that the  skipper already owns. Owning a boat is 80% of  the way to singlehanding so in owning a boat, any  boat, the skipper has taken the first large step.  There is a boat for every budget; the Cal 20  “Black Feathers” was purchased for just $1,000,  but completed the Singlehanded Transpac. The  first, last and only criteria for the beginner is to  get a boat and get out on the water.  
Unfortunately, it is virtually impossible to be a  singlehander without owning a boat. No one is  going to lend a boat to be taken out alone.  
The worst boat is the one that will be purchased  “next year.” I know of too many wannabees who  spend their time searching for the perfect boat, but  never get out on the water. I’ve had many  conversations with these dreamers, asking me  what boat they should buy, doing months of  research on one boat, then another. It seems they  can name every design and model, but they never  pull away from the dock. Until they does so, they  are only pretenders. But the moment they get out  on the water, they become a singlehanded sailor.  Here is my decree: If a person misses even one  season for lack of a boat, he is a dreamer, not a  sailor.  
When searching for a boat, the singlehander has a  terrific advantage over the crewed boat owner. It  seems that the most modern boats, those built  within the past five years and thus the most  expensive, are the least suitable for singlehanding.  Older fiberglass boats, built twenty to thirty years  ago, by their nature have the design features that  are best suited to singlehanding.  
The key features to seek out are:  
1. Helm: Tiller rather than a wheel. A tiller is  almost a requirement for singlehanding, for  several reasons. First, a tiller is designed to be  
used while sitting; a wheel is designed to be  used while standing. There will be times  when the singlehander is at the helm for hours  on end. The ability to sit is paramount.  Second, it is easy to control a tiller between  the knees while standing or under the leg  while sitting. These are necessary when  pulling sheets during a tack or when raising a  halyard. Third, a tiller can be operated from  the front or side, while a wheel is designed to  be used from behind. It takes gymnastic  abilities to extricate oneself from behind  modern wheels that stretch from rail to rail.  The singlehander must be able to move around  the cockpit very quickly to control lines. A  tiller is required regardless of the size of the  boat. Even the most modern Class 40 and  Open 60 designs include a tiller.  
Fourth, a wind vane works better with a tiller  than a wheel. Friction is greatly reduced and  the force from the wind vane is more directly  
transmitted to the rudder stock. Finally, a tiller  opens up more space in the cockpit and  eliminates all the cables and quadrants below  deck which are subject to wear and breakage  and take up useful space. At anchor the tiller  can be raised to the vertical leaving the whole  cockpit free.  
2. Cockpit: Small rather than large. The  singlehander must be able to control all of the  major lines while at the tiller, even if this  means stretching forward with the tiller  between his knees. Modern racing boats have  massive cockpits designed to hold six or eight  crewmembers, with winches on the cabin top  ten or fifteen feet away from the tiller. These  are wholly unsuitable. Older style cockpits  are compact and crowded with just two crew.  These are the best choice.  
3. Mast: Strong and secure. When things go  wrong, a singlehander will put far more stress  on the mast than a crewed boat. The boat will  broach more often and there will be times 

when the spinnaker is dragging in the water.  These events are common and must not break  the mast. Modern boats have spindly masts  that snap under the slightest pressure.  
4. A single backstay without running backstays.  Runners add complexity at the very moment -  while tacking or gybing, that the skipper needs  simplicity. A runner can only be allowed if it  will not get in the way during a tack or gybe,  even if it is entirely ignored, and if using the  runner incorrectly will not cause damage to  the sails or mast. At night, in high winds and  tight waters, adding two extra lines to a tack  or gybe is insane. Modern boat designs seem  to add an unending number of control lines.  For the singlehander, the fewer lines the  better.  
5. Below deck: Simplicity is best. An amusing  feature of modern boat designs is having two  heads, even on boats less than 40’. It is  thought that there must be a head for the  owner’s family, along with a separate head for  their guests. Obviously only one head is  required for the singlehander. A two burner  stove is ideal, rather than a big galley. A  small navigation station with minimal  instruments is better than something designed  like the Starship Enterprise. Once again, the  singlehander prefers a simple boat. This is in  contrast to the modern complex boat designs,  so by its very nature will be less expensive  than a comparable crewed boat.  
6. A key reason why autopilots burn a significant  amount of power is that some boat designs are  hard to steer. The sad truth is that some boats  are too heavy and have poorly designed, or  unbalanced rudders. One should carefully  assess the suitability of a particular boat for  long-distance singlehanding before buying it,  and a big part of this is the  
hull/rudder/steering systems. Avoid the full  
keel, barn-door ruddered bruiser that weighs  as much as an island.  
Singlehanding makes up a tiny amount of the total  sailboat market. There are very few boats  designed specifically for the singlehander, and all  have been designed for racers and none for  cruisers. Two types, the Mini 6.50 and the Class  40, are both considered extreme racing machines  and are at either end of the boat spectrum that I  am covering in this book, so I will not examine  them in detail. In addition, nearly all of the Minis  and Class 40s are custom builds.  
Figaro Bénéteau II 
Only one dedicated singlehanded design is being  built in production quantities: the Figaro Bénéteau  II, designed by Marc Lombard specifically for the  Figaro racing series. At 10.15 metres (33’) this  falls in the middle of my coverage range of 20’- 40’. It is reasonable priced new and there is an  active market for used boats and there are even a  number of boats available to lease for a single  racing season (www.classefigarobeneteau.com).  Thus it is worth looking at in more detail. The  reader should understand that this is a serious  racing boat designed to cross oceans. However,  given that the lessons learned from racing any  type of vehicle (car or bicycle) are later  transferred to non-racers, it is interesting to  examine what design decisions were made with  this model.  
“La Solitaire du Figaro” (www.lasolitaire.com) is  a well developed series of singlehanded races  taking place over four weeks in July and August  each year. The races run between various ports in  France, with longer legs to Ireland and back. This  is a true open ocean event. The Bay of Biscay is  considered to have some of the roughest waters in  the North Atlantic. 

This is a “one  
design” event,  
open only to the  
Figaro II. This  
boat was  
specifically  
designed for this  
series of races.  
Many of the  
world’s best  
known single 
handed skippers  
enter the series,  
but it is also open  
to amateurs, thus I consider it to be a good  representation of the keen sailor’s abilities.  
The only formalized singlehanded school that I  am aware of is the Artemis Offshore Academy,  which uses the Figaro II to train sailors. John  Thorn provided the following description:  
The Artemis Offshore Academy is a  UK training programme of  
excellence for British short handed sailors, providing a  structure to bring talented  sailors up through the ranks.  Designed to help them win major  offshore solo and short-handed  races in the future, the ultimate  goal is to put a British sailor  in a strong position to win the  Vendée Globe in 2016 or 2020.  
The Academy offers a unique  Scholarship to race on the Figaro  circuit each year with a fully  funded campaign. In a natural  progression to the top of the  sailing world the sailors will  then most likely move into IMOCA  60 racing.  
The Academy has a Development  Squad of eight members as well as  two Associate members. The  Development Squad sailors are  selected at the selections trials  
held once a year at the Weymouth  and Portland National Sailing  Academy. The Associate members  are sailors who already have  funded campaigns but wish to  train alongside the Academy. The  training programme is run from  November to April in La Grande  Motte (France) at the prestigious  Figaro training the Centre  D’Entrainment Méditerranéen  (CEM). The race programme  includes official and unofficial  Classe Figaro events in France  and RORC races in the UK.  
Unfortunately, the Artemis school is only  available to selected members and is not open to  paying students.  
Our interest is not in the race series, but in the  boat itself. I had a long discussion with designer  Marc Lombard (www.marclombard.com) about  his baby. In particular, I asked him to compare  how he designed it to be a singlehanded boat  versus a crewed boat of the same size. I also  spoke with skipper Murray Danforth, perhaps the  only North American Figaro II owner. Most  recently I spoke with Charles Darbyshire,  Technical Director of the Artemis Offshore  Academy, which trains singlehanded sailors in the  UK. He commented “These people train like  Olympic athletes, much more than an amateur.”  
Marc explained that the design team met with a  group of highly skilled skippers of the older  Figaro model to ask for their requirements for the  race series. Naturally there were differing  opinions on every aspect of the boat. In many  cases the majority ruled, but in others the team  had to rely on their own expertise in meeting  conflicting desires. 

Thoughts, Tips, Techniques and Tactics for Singlehanded Sailing  

Final boat cost played a significant role in the  design. The Figaro II is intended to be within the  price range of the average sailor, and not solely  for sponsored professionals. With a length of  10.1 metres, the beam was established at 3.4  metres to control costs.  
The boat had to meet a basic minimum weight of  three tonnes empty, to meet Category A  requirements for open water stability. The final  design came in at 3,050 kg. There are 240 litre  water ballast tanks on each side for upwind  power. The designers were not allowed to use  larger tanks because stability would be threatened  if the boat was sailed with a crew of six in other  races. (Note that the much smaller Mini 650s  have up to 450 litres of water ballast.)  
For upwind sailing, the water ballast can be  transferred from side to side via gravity in about  15 seconds. It is controlled by levers in the  cockpit. The process is to open the valves and  allow the water to drop, then close the valves  again, just before tacking. The ballast is not so  great as to overly tip the boat during this process.  If the tanks are empty, a pump can fill them in  about four minutes. A scoop drops below the boat  for this purpose, or to empty the tanks.  
Marc explained that with the Figaro II, upwind is  where the difference between skilled and  unskilled sailors becomes apparent. The boat  responds quickly to changes in sail trim. To  excel, the skipper must have a strong theoretical  knowledge and a lot of practice in differing  conditions. The twin rudders provide control  regardless of boat heal while beating windward.  
The boat has a single backstay, without runners.  This was requested by the skippers to avoid  tangling with the sails. The mainsail is a  traditional shape without the large headboards  more recently popular. The mainsail will slide  past the backstay in higher winds. In lighter wind,  the backstay can be eased to allow the main to  
pass under. Marc mentioned other recent boat  designs with no backstay. The single backstay  allows the fractional, double spreader  
mast and main to be adjusted as necessary for  optimal trim in upwind racing.  
The mainsail is a large 36 m² with two standard  reef points. The fractional foresail is only 28 m².  Marc described this as desirable for fewer  headsail changes, a benefit to singlehanders.  
The cockpit was designed so that all the major  controls can be accessed by the skipper while at  the helm. The jib sheets cross over the cockpit to  the windward side of the boat, allowing him to  make adjustments while seated.  
For downwind racing, the hull has a wide, flat  stern with twin rudders. This was a particular  requirement to singlehanding as the boat will  
often be run by autopilot. The design allows a  skipper to launch and gybe a spinnaker in 30  knots of wind with the pilot in full control. The  hull shape is incredibly stable in these conditions.  Marc explained that downwind, the boat becomes  more stable the faster it goes. He commented that  the twin rudder design will stop any broach in its  early stages. Broaches are very rare in the races,  even when the boats are pushed to their limits. As  a user, Murray Danforth confirmed this stability.  He commented that the rudders really dig into the  water and grip it very tightly. A narrow hull with  single rudder would be much less stable. Watch  the video at: http://tinyurl.com/33npp7 for a great  view of sailing in 55 knots wind. Note in  particular 1) the skipper’s light hand on the tiller;  2) how the autopilot is able to hold course when  he is on the bow; 3) the stern view showing the  twin rudders grip on the water.  
There was debate between the skippers over the  choice between symmetrical and asymmetrical  spinnaker. In the end, majority ruled and the  symmetrical chute was chosen. According to  Marc, the Figaro is a tactical race where skippers 

want a complete range of options in their route.  Symmetrical spinnakers allow for much deeper  sailing, and thus more routing options.  
I asked Charles Darbyshire how they train his  students performs a spinnaker gybe in 30 knots of  wind. This is something that they practice  extensively. His first answer was “very quickly.”  They use twin sheets and guys and twin fore guys  (pole downhauls). Most important, they have no  wasted movements. Charles contrasted them  against an expert crew on a Mumm 30: The  singlehanded skipper only makes one trip to the  bow and one trip back to the cockpit. He  performs all the necessary tasks during this one  trip, grabbing lines along the way fore and aft.  They gybe the main first, then move forward to  gybe the pole. The entire process is described  fully in Chapter 7.  
Charles pointed out that the spinnaker design for  the Figaro II is much more stable than another  performance boat of similar size. A key to gybing  is completing the entire maneuver while at the  fastest point of sail, while surfing down a wave  when the pressure on the spinnaker is least.  Problems will occur if the skipper is delayed past  this brief window of opportunity.  
An NKE autopilot package is normal for the boat,  but the skippers can install any brand as desired.  The autopilot controls are normally mounted next  to the main hatchway, but again this is up to the  individual. Most skippers use a remote control for  all of the autopilot functions, including gybing  from the foredeck. Charles noted that the  performance settings of each racing boat are set  individually, after many hours of personalized  testing. The racers even change the gain settings  for upwind and downwind legs of a race to get the  maximum performance.  
Multi-hulls  
A quick note to say that multi-hulls require a skill  set that it well beyond the scope of this book and,  
I believe, well beyond the abilities of all but the  most experienced singlehanders. The issue is that  cat’s and tri’s have a nasty tendency to flip. Once  overturned, there is no way to bring them back  upright. Multi-hulls are constantly sailed on the  razor’s edge. It takes an experienced helmsman to  keep them under control. An autopilot cannot  reliability perform this role, but singlehanding  relies on an autopilot. So there is a necessary  contradiction.  
Several years  
ago a major  
transatlantic  
race was held  
with mono-hulls  
and multi-hulls.  
Although the  
weather was  
typical for the race, 40% of the multi-hulls  capsized and required rescue. To me it is  puzzling that one would enter a race with a 40%  (or even 5%) chance that they will need rescue.  
As I have mentioned elsewhere, self sufficiency is  the bedrock of singlehanded sailing. The skipper  should be able to get himself to port under all but  
the most extreme circumstances. I don’t believe  that an extra strong blast of wind is sufficient  reason to require rescue.  
Insurance: 
Five years ago, as I was preparing for the  Singlehanded Transpac, I contacted my insurance  broker about the trip. This company, which is  promoted by my yacht club, claimed to be  specialists in marine insurance. They rightfully  requested my sailing resume and, as expected, it  showed my extensive singlehanded experience.  However, not only did they refuse to insure my  race, they doubled my normal premiums because I  singlehand my boat so much. It was obvious that  they had no understanding of me or of  singlehanding in general. I was appalled and  dropped them immediately with severe prejudice. 

Clearly, insurance is one of the major problems  facing singlehanders. There are many companies  that claim to be marine specialists, but very few  have any understanding of singlehanding. It is not  that we face extra risks, but that we face different  risks that can be managed appropriately.  
It is a sad fact that only a very few underwriters  are willing to look at singlehanded boats  anywhere in the world. This is a significant  problem for the brokers. I spoke with a large  marine insurance underwriter. They were willing  to take on singlehanders for coastal sailing with  strict conditions, but not offshore racers. They  said that there was simply not enough data for  them to make good a good judgement on  insurable risks.  
Fastnet Marine Insurance, in the U.K., is one of  the world leaders in obtaining insurance for  singlehanded sailors and in particular racers.  Fastnet is a broker, as such they seek out coverage  on a policy by policy basis from insurance  underwriters who provide the actual coverage.  They are willing to attempt to find coverage for  singlehanders located anywhere in the world, but  they are only able to do so if the Insurance  underwriters are licensed to in that location. As  such, they have struggled with yachts in the U.S.  because there are only a few underwriters able to  provide this coverage.  
I posed a number of direct questions to Richard  Power, their Director of Business Development.  
The role of the insurance broker is to develop a  proper relationship between the sailor and the  insurance company. Like a marriage guidance  counselor, the best way to do this is by ensuring  that both parties are aware of “material facts”  before they enter the relationship. From the  insurance company’s point of view, sailing or  racing the boat singlehanded would definitely fall  under the heading of material fact.  
The singlehander is approaching any insurance  company with a significant handicap. His hobby  is certainly difficult and might even be considered  illegal. Without advance planning, the skipper’s  negotiating position is virtually nil.  
There is some level of truth to the idea that an  insurance company will try to avoid paying out on  large claims. The role of the insurance broker is  to make this as difficult as possible - before the  accident occurs.  
Thus, it would be unwise for a sailor to simply  announce to the company that he was a  singlehander, without significant further  qualification in terms of how he is managing the  special circumstances. The skipper should list  both his experience and the changes made to the  boat particular to ensuring a claims free  singlehanded passage. The list should include:  • Watch keeping equipment: AIS, radar, Sea me, etc.  
• Redundancy in autopilot equipment.  • Knowledge of unpowered self steering  methods, (like in this book..)  
• Strength of the mast; renewed standing  rigging, etc. (mast breakage is a major cost to  insurance companies).  
Insurance companies have clauses particular to  marine insurance, and these have special  significance to the singlehander. These are  fundamental requirements, placed on the  shoulders of the skipper, which should be  considered paramount:  
“You will exercise reasonable care to make  the Vessel Seaworthy at the start of this  policy, and you will exercise reasonable care  throughout the period of insurance to make  and keep the Vessel in a Seaworthy condition”  (Allianz Yachting and Boating).  
What is “seaworthy” on a crewed boat is  obviously different from what is seaworthy to a  singlehander. The skipper needs to ensure that his  is a seaworthy singlehanded boat. Some insurers 

could legitimately state that keeping the vessel in  a “seaworthy condition” includes making sure that  she is properly manned and that a lookout is  maintained at all times. To have any level of  success, the skipper must put forth a valid counter  argument with his application.  
Some policies have strict limitations on  singlehanded voyages:  
“You are covered for singlehanded passages  not exceeding 24 hours but not otherwise,  providing the Vessel is suitably equipped.”  (Navigators & General Yacht & Motorboat  policy)  
“The Vessel must only be sailed between the  hours of sunrise and sunset local time and  only for a cumulative total of 50 nautical  miles per day unless she is manned by two  people of adequate physical strength at least  one of whom is competent to be in command.  (Yachtsure 10/95 policy)  
But for all yacht insurance policy wordings, the  Insurers would not expect the yacht to be sailed,  let alone raced, singlehandedly, unless they had  agreed to this in advance.  
The experience or inexperience of the sailor  would be reflected in the policy price. Richard  emphasized that they would try to avoid punitive  pricing by gathering as much detail about the  yacht preparations as possible. He would use this  information to negotiate the best possible terms  with the insurers. Skippers with relatively little  experience will be asked to provide extensive  detail on proper yacht preparation, taking expert  advice, taking courses, etc. Richard commented  that inexperience is not necessarily reflected in  insurance pricing as long as the requested details  are forthcoming.  
In terms of pricing, singlehanders can expect to  pay more than a similar crewed yacht - up to 50%  higher premiums. For example, a Figaro II,  would be insured in the region of £1,250 to  
£1,500 for a year’s coverage, including the SORC  series and full racing risks.  
However, it is with the deductable that the real  differences appear. The skipper should expect a  significantly increased deductable on actual  damages when sailing singlehanded. Richard  suggested that SORC entries should expect to pay  a deductable of approximately 1% - 1.5% of the  value of the yacht, compared to ½ % or even less  for a fully crewed yacht. There would not be  much difference in this deductable for  singlehanded cruisers versus racers, given that the  type of singlehanded sailing being done (i.e.  cruising or racing) is specifically endorsed to the  policy.  
Richard emphasized that singlehanded cruisers do  not face the same risks as racers, and are able to  negotiate better rates. I asked if he would be able  to provide insurance for “an extended cruise to  many exotic ports around the world?” Richard  replied that as long as the skipper installed  appropriate self steering gear and other necessary  equipment, and he maintained that gear  throughout the voyage, coverage would not be a  problem. If any breakdowns occurred, the skipper  would be responsible to carry out repairs at the  earliest opportunity – certainly he would not set  off on any voyage over 24-hours without full  operation.  
The more boat preparation and the greater detail  available, the better the broker is able to negotiate  terms with the underwriter. For example, having  the most modern watch keeping equipment on  board will be a factor in their discussions.  
Insurance underwriters are adverse to skippers  with a bad claims history. I would suggest from  this that skippers should limit claims to the truly  serious amounts, certainly amounts greater than  the deductable. It is better to eat a few thousand  Euros now than have insurance refused later. 

As the most possible extreme in singlehanded  sailing, I asked Richard to look at the Global  Ocean Race for Class 40 yachts. Fastnet is  looking to be a key supplier of insurance to these  skippers. Obviously as a round-the-world race  this is not indicative of what most singlehanders  will require, but it does point toward the type of  questions that should be considered by every one  of us. The six page questionnaire included:  • Detail any accidents/claims/losses.  • Did the losses take place whilst racing?  • List all offshore voyages over 1000nm, for  
each year, over the past 10 years; fully  crewed, short handed, singlehanded.  
• List all offshore races over 1000nm, for each  year, over the past 10 years; fully crewed,  short handed, singlehanded.  
• Include any information about your yachting  experience which may affect potential  insurer’s judgement about your application.  
• Detail your plans/programme for the yacht  over the next 12 months, including refit work,  trials, qualification voyages and races, sponsor  entertainment days, etc. Include the locations  and indicate which voyages/races will be  singlehanded, double handed, etc.  
• Provide material and builder of the main  components: hull, mast, rigging, rudders,  engine.  
Fastnet hopes that they will not need to refuse  anyone because of inexperience. They are  working to demonstrate to the underwriters that  Class 40 is a capable offshore boat. Additionally,  they want to prove that the safety procedures  adopted and enforced by the race organizers lead  to insurable risks for all entrants.  
Pricing for a round-the-world race will reflect the  additional risks of total loss from a relatively  minor event that would necessitate abandoning  the boat. For example, a boat stricken in the  English Channel can be towed to port. The same  boat in the Southern Ocean is a write off; the cost  or even the possibility of salvage is unrealistic.  
Richard suggested that premiums will be in the  range of 3% to 4% of the boat’s total value, or 2-3  times the normal rate.  
On the other extreme, I asked Richard to look at  Mini 650 racers. He commented that they have  not been able to find any UK underwriter to cover  them. He knows of only one company, in France,  that will provide this coverage. So Fastnet is not  sourcing insurance for the Minis. “We have to  draw the line somewhere.”  
Boat Setup  
Jack lines:  
I start with jack lines because I consider them to  be the most important item on my boat. As a  serious singlehander, I alone am responsible for  my life. I sail in the North Pacific, where the  water temperature is never above 12°C. If I  become detached from the boat more than a few  hundred yards from shore, I’m dead. It’s that  simple.  
Jack lines should be made from strong, flat  webbing. Do not use a rope line or tubular  webbing because it will roll under foot. The jack  lines must be mounted so that the singlehander  can walk from the bow to the stern without  unclipping the harness. It is completely  unacceptable to use jack lines which require  unclipping when passing the shrouds or sheets.  On my boat the shrouds are slightly inboard, so I  run the jack lines outside of the shrouds and jib  sheet, but inside the lifelines.  
The jack lines can run very close to the bow.  However they must stop well short of the stern,  such that the skipper will not drag even an inch  behind the boat. It is simply impossible to pull  oneself back up a line with a boat moving at 5  knots. Add the length of the tether to the back of  the jack lines to see the total length. Then either  shorten the tether or shorten the jack lines. 

Because jack lines are such a vital piece of  equipment, I suggest leaving them permanently  mounted on the boat. Do not remove them when  returning to the dock, because the temptation will  be to not replace them the next sunny sailing day.  Nylon jack lines will deteriorate in the sun, so  they should be purchased annually.  
The Pacific International Yachting Association  has set these standards for Jack-lines on crewed  boats:  
Jack-lines with a minimum  breaking strength of 4,500 pounds  (2040 kg) shall be fitted each  side from cockpit to bow such  that crew can clip on before  leaving the cockpit. Jack-lines  shall be attached to fittings  equal to the full strength of the  attached jack-line.”  
 “Safety snap-on line and harness  for each crew member. The  
recommended assembly shall be  ready for use, all components  attached. Load-bearing  
components, including attachment  fittings, shall withstand a  static load of at least 700  kilograms (1540 lbs.) The safety  line shall attach to the harness  at chest level and the harness  shall support the upper back.”  
Falling overboard is obviously a rare occurrence.  I posted a request for experiences on the Petit  Bateau forum, and these are the responses I  received. These responses are from different  skippers, thus may be conflicting:  
• In 1999, Harvey Schlasky and a  crew member sailed in the  Double-Handed Farallones Race  out of San Francisco. They had  rigged jack lines from pulpit  to push pit, i.e., the entire  length of the boat. When  
knocked over, the crew member  was thrown across the boat and  
dragged alongside it. He was  able to climb back on board.  Unfortunately Schlasky’s tether  slid to the end of the jack  lines, so he was dragged behind  the boat and perished.  
• In this year's OSTAR I got  washed overboard whilst  
changing headsails. I was  hanging over the upper  
guardrail - bashing against the  hull as we continued at 5 knots  under main in around 25 knots  of wind. I have a second  
shorter lifeline on my harness  & used this to attach myself  under the lower guardrail to  the jackstay, before releasing  the longer one, & slipped back  on board - very quickly! I did  have the benefit that a  
Contessa 32 has low freeboard.  
• I was washed overboard in a  very bad storm on Ostar '76  about 1000 miles west of the  Scillies. I was hove to with a  storm jib and fully reefed  main. My wind speed indicator  (analogue in those days of  course) had been on the stops  at it's limit of 60knots for  most of the night. I was  
sitting in the cockpit in the  early hours, having decided to  remove all sail and run under  bare poles. I was trying to  work out the best way of going  about it when a breaking wave  knocked down my 32ft Pioneer  10. She had been coping with  the huge waves until the  
breaking one arrived. I was  washed straight over the side  as she capsized and when I  eventually surfaced, I was very  relieved to find my harness was  still attached and in one  piece. The next problem was to  get back on board. I was over  the port (lee) side with my 

lifeline attached to it's  anchorage point on the cockpit  sole. One option was to work my  way round to the stern and use  the Aries to climb back aboard  but I didn't fancy that as it  meant detaching myself from the  lifeline. While pondering the  problem, the solution presented  itself because the next big  wave rolled the boat. I was  able to wait for the next wave  and when the boat rolled  towards me, I grabbed a  
stanchion base and get a leg on  to the boat, then as it rolled  upright I slid in under the  guard rail.  
I was lucky to be able to get  back aboard and two things made  it possible 1) the boat was not  moving forward as the sails  were trashed by the capsize and  she had been hove to. 2)  because of the huge waves and  the boat being broadside on to  them she was rolling heavily.  The strange thing is that in a  flatter sea, I would have had  much greater difficulty getting  back aboard.  
If a singlehander goes over the  side with the boat under way  with any forward speed and the  boat is being controlled by a  windvane or autopilot, it would  be nigh on impossible to get  back on board unless he has a  means of bringing the boat head  to wind. With a windvane such  as an Aries, one could arrange  to have control lines over the  stern and bring her head to  wind. I can't think of a way to  do it under electronic  
autopilot. It is a nightmare  scenario to imagine being over  the side and being towed along  by boat doing 6 or 7 knots.  
• I have been involved in several  man overboard trials. It may  seem illogical but it is much  easier getting back on a moving  boat than a stationary one –  unless that is you are  
unfortunate enough to fall over  to windward. There are two  reasons for this. 1. the  
freeboard is less as the boat  is heeled towards you. 2. As  you are towed on your lifeline  your body is on or near the  water's surface. Once, when  being towed at about 5 knots, I  was able to hook an arm and a  leg over the rail and roll in  under the guard wires.  
For the AZAB 75 and OSTAR 76  (also in a Pioneer 10) I rigged  weighted lines, one each side  from about midships to the  stern so that when deployed  they would hang about 2 feet  below the surface. These were  held on deck by some light  twine, the theory being that I  could reach the line in the  water, yank it to break the  twine and have a loop in the  water to help me step  
(delicately) back on board.  Luckily I never tested it.  Andrew Bray, EDITOR, Yachting  World  
Tether: A tether should use proper, strong  carabiners like those used by mountain climbers  or properly made for sailing harnesses. The  skipper must be able to clip and unclip the tether  quickly with one hand, for two reasons:  
First, if it requires two hands, there will be many  times when the skipper forgoes clipping on simply  because one hand is busy on the tiller or holding a  sheet. I will repeat this sentiment several times in  the book. A singlehander is just as likely to fall  off the boat on a stormy day with high winds  when he is being extra careful as he is on a nice 

day when nothing significant is happening, but is  just off guard for a fraction of a second. It is on  one of those nice days when he might just skip  clipping on if it is the least bit difficult. Human  nature is such that people will avoid  
“unnecessary” work unless it is made as simple as  possible.  
Second, the skipper must be able to unclip with  just one hand in situations where the other hand is  busy. For example, if the tether gets caught on a  cleat in the middle of a spinnaker gybe. It is  much easier, and in the end probably safer, to  unclip rather than leave the spinnaker pole  swinging across the boat. I am not so unrealistic  to think that the tether must be worn every second  of every voyage. The easier it is to clip on and  clip off, the more likely that the skipper will wear  it more of the time.  
Some boaters insist on locking carabiners. I have  no problem with this concept as long as they can  be quickly and easily fastened and unfastened  blindly with one hand. In nine years of running  all over my boat dragging my tether, I have never  had a carabiner detach from the jack lines or my  harness, so I don’t feel that a locking mechanism  is necessary. I have heard of situations where the  jack line runs parallel to a sheet and the carabiner  runs onto the sheet. My suggestion is to move the  jack line to a new position where this can not  happen.  
Some races insist on a quick release mechanism  for the clip. I disagree with this concept. First, I  have never seen a quick release mechanism that  
can be easily fastened with one hand. If this can’t  be done, it won’t be used for the reasons  mentioned above. Second, I can not imagine the  circumstances were I would want to be detached  from the boat. Even if I am thrown overboard and  dragging injured beside the boat, this is a much  better situation than watching the boat sail away.  I can see the safety advantage of a quick release  on a crewed boat, but not singlehanding.  
The tether must be long enough so that the skipper  can move from rail to rail without unclipping  during normal tacking or gybing. After a tack, it  will be necessary to unclip from the leeward jack  line and clip to the windward jack line in order to  walk up the windward side of the boat.  
A solution to this is to use two tethers – one on  each side of the boat. Both tethers must still be  long enough to reach across the boat. After each  tack and when settled on the new course, the  skipper can just clip onto the windward tether.  
A different  
configuration  
is to skip the  
jack lines  
and use a  
longer tether  
fastened to  
the centre of  
the deck aft  
of the mast. This tether must be long enough to  reach both the bow and stern, but once again not  allow the user to drag behind the boat. This  system will only work if the mainsheet and  traveler are on the transom, so that the skipper  need not unclip for every tack.  
Hand rails A  
single-hander  
must be able to  
work his way  
to the bow,  
even under  
very rough  
conditions. But  
the distance  
from the mast to the bow is very much a no-mans  land. On a typical boat there is nothing solid to  hold on the foredeck. Lifelines are not sturdy and  do not provide a stable grip. In fact it is very  common for singlehanders to avoid the bow  during a storm, leaving a jib that is too large for  the wind. 

A set of hand rails mounted on the foredeck will  solve this problem. I’ve mounted hand rails  along the toe rails on both sides of the boat. I can  crawl to the bow under any rough conditions to  change the jib for a storm jib.  
Lines in General:  
Crewed sailing boats have made tremendous  advancements with tuning all aspects of the mast  and sails. This has led to an incredible number of  control lines mounted around the boat. With a  full crew, it is possible to handle these lines, but a  singlehander must concentrate on only the key  lines that will create the most significant change.  Lines that only offer incremental advantages  should be avoided – the skipper does not have the  time or energy to manage them all. A small  number of lines will provide 95% of the control  possible from a significantly greater number. The  singlehander should accept this 95% and  disregard the remainder.  
Lines are also a threat to the safety of the sailor so  the number and length of lines should be reduced  as much as possible. Especially at night, lines are  
likely to be everywhere around the boat. It is  impossible to eliminate the lines but it is possible  to make them manageable. The only way is to  store the lines in exactly the same place every  time.  
Halyards  
It is commonly thought that all of the halyards  should be lead to the cockpit. This is certainly  true for the jib and spinnaker, but not necessary  for the mainsail.  
The main halyard can be left on the mast because  it is usually the first sail to raise and the last to  drop. On most sailing days the singlehander will  only raise and lower the main one time. As well  the skipper will likely be at the main halyard  when the motor is running and the boat is flat on  the water. The main is probably the most  
physically difficult sail to raise in terms of weight  so we don’t want to add extra turning points that  require extra effort. Even in the worst possible  weather, it is still safe to take the few steps from  the cockpit to the mast to put in a reef. When  reefing the main, the skipper must be at the mast  to tie it up anyway. Having the main halyard  right next to the reefing line on the mast is very  convenient. It makes it possible to drop the main  and tighten the reef lines from one position.  
One problem with having the main halyard on the  side of the mast is the difficulty of reefing in a  heavy wind when the halyard is on the leeward  side. It is an awkward position if the boat is  listing 45° while attempting to handle the halyard  from the bottom side. In these cases I just tack so  that I’m on the top again.  
The jib and spinnaker halyards are used in tandem  and are used several times for each trip, so they  should be lead to the cockpit. The halyard  clutches should be mounted in a spot where they  can be reached with the tiller between the legs,  even if it is a stretch. The day will come when a  really beautiful spinnaker run turns into  something stronger than the autohelm can handle -  or it will have quit altogether. The skipper must  be able to drop the spinnaker while steering the  boat. Since the spinnaker drop requires both  hands, steering with the knees is necessary. The  singlehander should make these measurements at  the dock by stand in the cockpit with the tiller  between his knees. How far he can reach is the  limit of where the jib and spinnaker halyard  clutches should be mounted.  
Storage of the halyards of a raised sail is an  important consideration for both convenience and  safety. The best way to store halyards is in a rope  bag positioned directly under the halyard clutch.  This serves two purposes: first, it stores the  halyard safely out from underfoot. It is not  possible to trip on a halyard tucked inside a bag.  Second it allows the halyard to run free when the 

sail is dropped. The skipper should not have to  worry about the halyard jamming during a drop.  
Line must not be coiled inside a rope bag. The  coil will tangle on itself inside the bag. Rather,  the line should be shoved into the bag starting  with the bitter end. Simply shove the line into the  bottom of the bag, one handful at a time until the  entire line is inside. This puts the end of the line at  the bottom and the entire line will come out in the  correct order.  
Because halyards are always stored in their bag in  the same place on every voyage, the skipper will  instinctively learn to avoid them in the dark.  Even if he does catch a halyard on his foot, he  will know exactly how to shed it in the dark  because he will have done it dozens of time in the  light.  
Winches:  
Self tailing, two speed winches are vital to the  singlehander. A significant amount of sheeting  will be performed with one hand and it will be  impossible to put the entire weight of the body  into cranking, as is normal with a crew. Spend  
the money to purchase a good set of winches.  They are used more than any other mechanical  device on the boat, so they must work well. Also  keep the winches well greased. This will have a  significant impact on their performance.  
Sheets:  
Virtually all sailing is done sitting on the  windward (high) side of the boat. As well, the  bulk of maneuvering the boat is done by hand,  rather than with an autohelm. So set up the sheets  to operate from the windward side while  maintaining one hand on the tiller.  
Jib sheet winches should be mounted just in front  of the normal, high side, seating position, where  they can be operated easily with one hand while  the other remains on the tiller. Most winches  come with a strong intended mounting direction,  
i.e. they are designed to mount in a particular  direction. On a normal boat with winches on the  leeward side, the winch would be aimed forward.  However, on a singlehanded boat, the sheet will  be coming up from the leeward side to the  windward side. So the winch must be aimed  toward the leeward side. (The installation manual  for the winches will indicate the strong direction.)  
A permanent turning block on the leeward side of  the boat is required to bring the jib sheet from the  leeward side to the windward side. Thus, when  sailing on a starboard tack, the jib sheet will run  down the port side of the boat to a turning block,  and then up to a winch on the starboard side next  to the skipper. It is very handy if the turning  block has a locking mechanism in place that will  allow the sheet to be locked even if it is removed  from the winch. There will be times when the  winch is needed for other purposes, such as for  the spinnaker sheet.  
Sheets are used continuously on any voyage, even  the shortest. A new pile of sheet is formed with  every tack. These piles are never neat and get in  the way of any activity in the cockpit. A very  easy method to reduce the length of lose line in  the cockpit is to use a single, continuous sheet.  This is rarely seen on boats but is incredibly  practical. It will eliminate virtually the entire  sheet piled in the cockpit. A single, continuous  sheet will be longer than one normal sheet, but  much shorter than two sheets.  
To create a continuous sheet, start with one end  tied to the clew of the jib. Run the sheet  backwards through the blocks on the leeward side  of the boat, around the windward winch with three  wraps, around the leeward winch, through the  blocks on the windward side of the boat and tie  the remaining end to the sail clew. 


It is very important that the sheets have no twists  prior to starting this process, using the method  described above. It is also important to wrap the  sheet three times around the windward winch and  one time around the leeward winch. This puts the  exactly correct number of twists into the line.  Thus the line laying in the cockpit will remain  twist free during the  
sailing trip.  
(Most sailors coil their  
lines in an 0 shape. This  
actually puts one twist in  
the line for each loop of  
the 0. It is better to coil  
heavy lines in an 8 shape.  
This is the natural way  
that lines want to fall, and does not add any twists.  The first time, hang the jib sheets from the mast to  remove all twists. Then, coil them in an 8 shape  thereafter.)  
It will take practice to become accustomed to the  continuous sheet method. But once mastered it is  clearly the better approach.  
Spinnaker sheets  
Because of the potential for trouble, it is even  more important that the spinnaker sheet be run  back to the singlehander sitting at the tiller. It  
may be possible to run the spinnaker sheet  directly from the spinnaker sheet block, across the  boat to the jib sheet winch on the windward side  of the boat. My boat has a second set of winches  on the cabin top. I use these winches for the  
spinnaker sheet and guy during the launch. After  the spinnaker is raised, I move the sheet back to  the jib winch on the windward side and take my  position at the tiller. I leave the guy on the cabin  top winch. When singlehanding the guy is used  much less than the sheet and is rarely needed in  emergencies. (In fact in most cases having the  guy slightly out of reach stops me from using it in  emergencies, which is the best thing.)  
Cleats  
Another tripping threat is hardware, in particular  cleats. These should be moved away from the  main walking areas. A cleat that is directly  underneath the lifelines is less likely to trip than a  cleat inboard by just a couple of inches. Other  hardware should be grouped to create avoidable  areas, rather than scattered randomly around the  deck. Leave open paths from the deck to the  cockpit when mounting hardware. After just a  few days on the water the skipper will intuitively  learn to follow the open paths.  
Clutches  
As boats have become more complicated with a  greater number of lines, the number of rope  clutches has grown significantly. Some sailors  have spread these clutches across the deck in an  attempt to keep the lines neat. But this takes up  the entire deck space, leaving no room to walk. It  is very important that adequate walking space be  left on both sides of the boat and on the cabin top.  It would be virtually impossible to walk on top of  lines with the boat healed at thirty degrees. The  lines will roll under foot. In conjunction with the  earlier comments about reducing the number of  control lines, clutches must be interspaced and  overlapped to reduce the overall footprint and  leave a significant amount of walking space.  
Tweaker Lines (Twing Lines)  
Tweaker lines are small diameter lines that run  along the spinnaker sheet at the widest point on  the boat. They are used to pull the sheet and guy  into the boat and add control. They are invaluable 

to the singlehander because they can control the  sheet and guy when the spinnaker pole downhaul  is released for gybing in higher winds. I use them  often.  
Sails:  
Singlehanding causes significantly greater wear to  sails than crewed sailing. The key reason being  that there are many times where a sail will be left  to flog for extended periods while something  more important or perhaps even critically  dangerous, is sorted out. For example, I was  entering a narrow channel hoping to keep the  spinnaker up from a run to a beam reach with the  winds blowing at 20 knots. Both the sheet and  guy got away and the chute was streaming from  the mast straight out the side. For at least two  minutes it was impossible to turn downwind  without running into the rocks. Only after passing  the channel marker was I able to turn, activate the  autohelm and douse the sail. The spinnaker was  flapping wildly during this time and undoubtedly  suffered extensive wear. A crew would have  pulled the chute down immediately but it was  impossible alone.  
In other cases, the mainsail will be flogging  wildly while it is reefed in 40 knot winds or the  genoa will be smashed into a ball and shoved  below deck when 10 knot winds suddenly gust up  to 20. Neatness and proper sail packing takes a  distant second place to safety when the skipper is  on a bucking, wet foredeck in these situations.  
High tech, Mylar or Kevlar sails are fantastic if  properly handled by a crew but will crack and  break under the flogging conditions typical to a  singlehander. Watching a $5,000 sail split in his  hands will bring tears to any sailor’s eyes.  
These plastic sails are also nearly impossible to  repair. Mylar kits are available to mend small  splits, but once patches are being applied over  older patches, it can be assumed that the sail has  finished its life. Experience has shown that  
extensive singlehanding will destroy these sails  beyond use in one or two years. The trouble with  high tech sails is that they go from practically  perfect to completely useless in an instant. There  is no middle ground lasting years or even months  when they are still workable.  

Unless the singlehander has money to burn,  standard Dacron sails will be the only possible  choice. Although Dacron will not hold its airfoil  shape past the first few seasons, at least it will still  be workable for many years. Dacron sails are  also very simple to repair with a sewing machine,  an awl, or even a needle and thread on the high  seas. The expense of a few trips to the sail loft for  repairs will convince the singlehander to learn  these skills.  
With Dacron, it is even possible to unstitch old  repairs and start fresh. This will be necessary at  key stress points, such as batten pockets which  will split open under flogging conditions.  (Specialty sewing machines are available for sails  at a reasonable price, but even cheaper are old  sewing machines from the 1960s. These have  metal gears necessary for sail repair.  
Modern machines with plastic gears  
are useless.)  
An awl with fine waxed thread is  
excellent for hand sewing. It is  
much better than standard needle and  
thread for repairs in the middle of a 

sail because it is worked mainly from one side. It  will also push through multiple layers of sail cloth  at seams and edges. www.speedystitcher.com  
Mainsail: The main must have at least two and  preferably three reef points. The first reef point  will be used very often. The second reef point a  
few times a year and the third reef point once  every year or two. It is impossible to predict the  weather or the winds. A day that starts with a  nice breeze can turn into a nice gale at any  moment with little warning. A singlehander must  be prepared to deal with these changes in a  seamanlike manner. This means properly  reducing the main and jib. It would be  irresponsible to leave the dock without the ability  to reduce sail to meet any wind conditions.  
Lazy Jacks: One of the greatest difficulties in  singlehanding is raising, lowering and reefing the  mainsail and boom. The main will flop around  wildly until it is completely raised and the boom  will bang  
violently inside  
the cockpit. A  
topping lift from  
the top of the  
mast to the end of  
the boom will  
stop damage from  
the boom, but it  
does not help in  
managing the sail.  
An additional  
problem is in  
neatly folding the mainsail for storage on top of  the boom. I’ve watched this to be a challenge for  a crew of four. It borders on impossible for a  singlehander.  
Lazy Jacks solve both of these problems. These  are a network of lines that run from a single point  well up the mast to multiple points on both sides  of the boom. Lazy Jacks should be designed to be  pulled away from the boom and secured on the  
mast when the boat is underway. They are known  to get tangled with the mainsail battens. Some  larger boats use fabric covers around the boom to  hold the sail. These are a problem because it is  very difficult to work with reef lines while  reaching under the fabric.  
Jib and Genoa: The key to the fore sail is that it  must go up and come down easily from the  cockpit. This usually means that hanks are  preferable to a sail foil.  
When raising the jib on a foil, even with a pre  feed, is likely to jam and the singlehander must  rush to the bow, release the sail and rush back  again to pull on the halyard. When dropping the  jib a foil will not let it fall to the deck on its own.  Hanks solve both of these problems. Hanks rarely  jam on the way up and will quickly drop by at  least a few feet when the halyard is released on  the way down. It is very simple for the  singlehander to grab armfuls of genoa and pull the  sail down onto the deck when using hanks.  
In my experience Wichard hanks are preferable to  piston hanks. The piston  
type requires two hands to  
hank on or off – one hand to  
pull the piston and one hand  
to move position the hank on  
the forestay. This can be  
dangerous or even impossible  
when crouched in a bouncing pulpit. Wichard  hanks can be easily clipped on or off with one  hand while the other is holding on to the boat.  The small ends of a piston hank are impossible to  
grab with gloved hands – not an issue with  Wichard hanks, and the piston hanks will seize  with salt, again not an issue with Wichard hanks.  
Wichard hanks have a drawback for boats using  an asymmetrical spinnaker. If the jib is still  raised, the spinnaker sheet may get caught in  Wichard hanks as the spinnaker is gybed. This is  a known problem on Mini 6.50 boats. This is 

only a problem with asymmetrical spinnakers, not  with symmetrical chutes.  
Regardless of the type used, hanks on all sails  should be positioned in the same direction so that  the singlehander knows, even in the dark, which  direction is used to hank-on or hank-off a sail. On  my boat all sails: the genoa, jib and storm jib all  hank on from port to starboard.  
A handy device is to run a line up the forestay,  woven between just a few of the hanks to the head  of the sail. This line is run through a block on the  deck and back to the cockpit. When the halyard is  released, the skipper can pull this line to pull  down the foresail.  
Although rarely seen, reef  
points on the fore sail are  
a good idea. These are  
common on the Mini  
6.50s. Changing head  
sails is difficult and  
exhausting. It is unlikely  
that a singlehander will  
want to reduce from a #1  
to a #2 for a slight  
increase in wind strength.  
But such changes would  
be common for a crewed  
boat. It is more likely that a singlehander will  drive the #1 past its suggested wind range or will  jump to a #3 before its required wind strength.  Putting reef points three feet up from the bottom  of the genoa will solve this problem by making  the jump to a #2 sail size much easier. The same  practice holds for the move from a #3 to a #4.  
The tack position on a reefed foresail should not  be at deck level. The entire foot of the reefed sail  should be at least six inches above the deck.  Otherwise water will collect in the bundle of  material at the foot of the reefed sail. A short line  should be used from the tack of the sail to the  boat. In addition, small drain holes with proper  
grommets should be positioned along the sail a  few inches below the reef points.  
I do believe that a singlehander should use the  largest sails designed for the boat. Some have  suggested that we not use a genoa but stick with a  jib for ease of tacking. I want my boat to sail as  fast as it is designed, so rather than sacrifice  speed, I have learned how to use the designed  sails.  
Roller furling sails are a great convenience for  the cruising singlehander. The key advantage  being that it is very easy to reduce sail from as  much as a Genoa to a tiny handkerchief with just  the pull on a line. Obviously they completely  eliminate the problem of dropping and bagging  the foresail. I know of several round-the-world  singlehanders who have used roller furling sails  very successfully. Their key disadvantage is the  only real reason they are not used half rolled by  racers: roller furling sails are cut for their fully  extended position. They lose their aerodynamic  shape and wing effect the moment they are rolled.  
Larger boats have used two roller furling sails to  eliminate the sail shape issue. A second forestay  is positioned a few feet back from the head stay.  
Of course every new solution offers its own  problems. The largest head sail must be tacked  through the relatively small gap between the two  forestays. This is not an issue on long voyages  but will be inconvenient in short tacking  situations. As well, sailors go to great lengths to  reduce weight up the mast. It is not appealing to  leave a large sail, permanently mounted all the  way up to the top of the mast. This is a very  significant amount of weight that must be  counterbalanced at the keel.  
This problem is corrected if the entire rolled sail,  including its foil, stay and roller, can be dropped  to the deck as one complete unit. This is an  incredibly neat and efficient way to store a sail on  deck. 

A self tacking jib is a real convenience for the  singlehander. Many modern racing boats use a  larger mainsail with a jib, rather than a genoa.  Self tacking jibs slide from side to side during  tacking and require no effort at all. Only when  sailing on a reach is any adjustment made to the  jib sheet.  
Positioning of the autopilot: It must be possible  to operate the autopilot from the tiller position.  During a typical sail there will be many times  when the autopilot is turned on and off, even for a  few seconds. Some of these times will be very  rushed so it must be within convenient reach. For  example at the start of a race the skipper will be  hand steering, but may need to rush to the bow for  a few seconds to skirt the jib. Using the autopilot  for just a 10 second spurt is very typical, even in a  cruising situation where the skipper just needs to  find his coffee cup. Autopilots are covered in  detail elsewhere.  
Spinnaker Socks 
I am not a fan of  
spinnaker socks. In  
the first case, they  
are just not  
necessary on 20’- 
40’ boats. If the  
skipper follows the  
detailed instructions  
set out in Chapter 7,  
she will never get  
into trouble with a  
spinnaker in any wind conditions. On the other  hand, there are several drawbacks to socks. The  most obvious is the extra lines and sock itself are  prone to fouling at the top of the mast. Second, a  singlehander should do everything possible to  reduce weight up the mast. A bunched up sock is  a lot of weight and wind resistance. The third,  and worst, issue is that the skipper must move to  the bow to work the sock. It is easy to imagine  using a sock on a nice sunny day with a moderate  breeze. But what happens when the wind  
increases to 20 knots against a current, and the  waves are a choppy 4’ high. Is this the time for a  sailor to be standing on the bow with her arms  above her head? It is very easy to drop the chute  directly into the cockpit under these conditions,  but difficult to use a sock. The boat is better off  without it.  
Spinnaker Net  
A spinnaker net is used to stop wraps around the  forestay. Nets are usually  
home-made from light  
webbing material, with sail  
hanks to connect to the  
forestay. The net is stretched  
between the forestay and  
mast. The biggest problem  
with nets is that they become  
a tangled mess when stored  
below deck. They should be  
tied in a nice bundle before  
storage. Another issue is that  
the net is in the way of the  
spinnaker pole uphaul during  
a gybe. My net has a very light bungee cord to  connect to the mast. (The white line visible in the  photo.) This bungee cord allows the net to be  pushed out of the way by the uphaul during the  gybe. It defeats the purpose of the net if it must  be disconnected from the mast in order to gybe.  
Spinnaker Design: 
The Figaro II uses spinnakers that are designed to  be “stable” for singlehanded sailing. I contacted  Rick McBride with Leitch McBride Custom  
Sailmakers in Sidney, British Columbia. They 

have a strong reputation with the local racing  community. Rick explained the differences  between a stable and a flat spinnaker. The skipper  should keep in mind that all spinnakers act like a  wing, with air flow from the luff to the leech,  even when sailing deep downwind.  
A stable spinnaker is designed to be used with  minimal attention to sail trim. It will fly even as  the apparent wind oscillates back and forth in  normal conditions. A flat spinnaker requires  constant trimming or it will collapse. A stable  spinnaker will have greater cord depth. This  allows the boat to sail higher or lower without the  sail stalling. It will also have a more elliptical  leach allowing the luff to fold over on itself  without collapsing. A flat sail will collapse if the  leading edge folds over at all.  
Like the wings in a jet airplane, a flat spinnaker  will be faster, but more prone to stalling or  collapsing than a stable spinnaker designed for  singlehanding. There is a trade off between speed  and stability that will depend on how much the  skipper is able to work the sheets over hours at a  time. The above drawings are highly exaggerated.  In reality a stable spinnaker will have a cord depth  only a few percent greater than a flat chute.  
Miscellaneous items:  
The key idea to boat setup is that those things that  are used minute to minute are positioned within  reach of the singlehander sitting at the tiller.  Items that are used less often require the  singlehander to stand up in the cockpit; and items  that are normally used just once per trip require  the singlehander to leave the cockpit.  
Over time I have added many convenience items  to the boat. For example, I have a coffee cup  holder right next to the tiller. If I am hand  steering for several hours, it is nice to know that  my coffee is within reach. I’ve also added a  holder for my GPS unit, so that I don’t drop it in  the cockpit or overboard (which I’ve done.)  
I have attached cloth bags just inside the main  hatch for items that I am likely to use only once  each trip. I can put sunglasses, sunscreen, a spare  knife, gloves and my GPS when not in use inside  these bags that can be accessed just by stepping to  the hatch.  
The singlehander should think about what he uses  during a voyage, and find his own way to store it  appropriately.  
Build a single fingered boat for desk voyages:  Print the next two pages back-to-back. (The *  mark should be approximately even on both sides  of the paper.)  
See the instructions at: http://tinyurl.com/52yrm  Set a course for office adventure. 


W E 
Foolish Muse 
  
Singlehanded Sailing 
Campaign
S 

* 
Foolish Muse 
Andrew Evans Singlehanded Sailing Campaign
  


And now nothing more. 
I want to be alone  
with my essential sea. 
I don't want to speak for a long time, 

Silence! I want to learn, 
I want to know if I exist. 
That 
Buck te 

Thoughts, Tips, Techniques and Tactics for Singlehanded Sailing  

Ch. 4: Power systems  
Electricity is the greatest cause of frustration to  every singlehanded sailor. Electrical problems  will lead to more voyage cancellations than any  other issue and electrical problems will cause the  skipper to spend more time in uncomfortable  twisted positions below chart tables than  anything else. Here are some quotes from highly  experienced singlehander Jeanne Socrates’ blog  over just eight days:  
• Managed to short across  circuit while testing AP drive  motor ...40A fuse blown - no  spare...!  
• Went to use multimeter to  check fuse - 'dead as a  
Dodo'...! Battery gone - no  spare  
• Used heatshrink butt joint to  bypass fuse and join wires  together - there's another 40A  fuse in same circuit so  
protected still... Discovered  instruments now permanently on  - despite switch at chart  table - seems I damaged relay  in blowing circuit  
• About to see if I can find out  what the problem is with my  ship's VHF radio - confirmed  yesterday as not transmitting.  Means getting (with  
difficulty!) to behind the  instrument panel yet  
again..... grrr! Maybe I'll  be able to see why my SSB  radio has lost its GPS input  while I'm back there..... and  have another go at fixing the  lost connection between the  same VHF radio and the AIS  unit...  
• "In for a penny, in for a  pound" ... I delved deeper and  removed the Pactor modem and  HF/SSB radio front to see if I  could restore the missing GPS  input to the radio - another  loose connection dealt with  ... YES - success!  
Lat/long/UTC - all displayed  again... I felt I deserved the  dark chocolate I rewarded  myself with later, after my  meal!!  
Jeanne has circumnavigated alone twice and is  on her third trip. She has faced these types of  problems since I met her 5 years ago. The  problems listed above were encountered on a two  year old boat with completely new electronics.  She has had numerous professionals working on  her boat and has become nothing less than an  expert herself. There is only one answer. If a  boat contains electronics, they will go wrong –  without question.  
So the singlehander faces two options: first is to  attend university for four years to receive a  degree in electronics engineering; second is to  drastically reduce the amount of electronics on  board. I prefer the second option.  
I AM A SAIL BOAT. I NEED ONLY WIND  TO MOVE MY MASTER SAFELY AND  COMFORTABLY TO ANY PORT IN THE  WORLD.  
This should be engraved on a bronze plaque and  mounted inside every singlehanders boat. I love  sailing. I want to spend my weekends sailing, not  
searching out fuses or looking for lose wires.  And when I undertake a long offshore voyage, I  do not want to be stopped by something that  takes four years of university to understand.  
Before leaving the dock, a singlehander must  ensure that the boat can be sailed safely to its  destination even with a complete power failure.  A power failure will occur – depend on it.  
Modern civilization teaches us that electronics  are the source of all safety, comfort and  happiness. (Take away any teenager’s cell  phone to prove my point.) By modern I mean  just the last ten years. Two decades ago no sailor  would leave port without knowing how to use a  compass and sextant. Today a chart plotting GPS 

tells us where we are, what heading to the  nearest port and the location of every rock in between. Just four decades ago, the famous  singlehander Bernard Moitessier undertook the  Golden Globe Race without even a radio. He  communicated through passing ships to the race  headquarters using signal flags. Today, how  many skippers would even notice if they passed  a boat signaling one of the distress messages.  
I have rambled on for a page and a half to make  one point: Electronics is bad. It will break.  Luckily, it is not necessary for the prepared  singlehander. The chapter on sailing techniques  explains how to sail with no autohelm or wind  vane. A singlehander is not prepared to leave the  dock until he understands these techniques.  
However, I am not so naive to think that we can’t  use electronics to make our lives easier. The  first thing a singlehander should do is reduce the  amount of electronics on the boat so that  inconvenience is limited in the event of a  complete power failure. The skipper should seek  out and eliminate any electronic gadgets on the  boat that can be done just as effectively  manually.  
The second step is to cut power consumption on  necessary items simply by turning them off. In  her famous Vendee Globe race, Ellen MacArthur  commented that she was spending eight hours a  day using a computer and internet connection to  research the weather. I was studying weather  forecasting at the time, and asked her what she  was researching in eight hours that could not be  done in a half hour. She answered, “nothing”.  The simple reason is that the boat was sailing  itself perfectly without her constant input. She  was just spending time. But she was also  wasting power.  
The singlehander should use a computer as  necessary, but no more so. If it takes a half hour,  then don’t spend one hour or eight hours. Turn  the computer off and read a book.  
Sailors have a bad habit of leaving instruments  running for the entire voyage, for example by  leaving the GPS chart plotter running 24 hours a  day in open water. Why? Every boat has a  mechanical compass. The GPS should be  activated for a few minutes every four hours just  to check the course. After that, it should be  turned off again and the mechanical compass  used. Another good example is collision  avoidance equipment. The radar, AIS, Sea-Me  or CARD should only be used when the skipper  is below deck. They should not be used when  the skipper is on deck day or night, except in  thick fog. The skipper has eyes; he should use  them and not waste more valuable power.  In particular, the display screens on electronic  devices can burn an inordinate amount of power.  At the very least, the display screens should be  put into sleep mode when not in active use.  
As a third step, stay in DC. Nearly all  electronics in the world are designed to function  in DC power. Those that are intended for home  use have added a built in AC adapter that  converts the power from AC to DC before it  enters the unit. (The AC to DC inverter is the  small black box commonly found on the end of a  power cord.) There is a very significant power  loss in moving from AC to DC. So all  electronics should be run directly from the boat  battery using a DC to DC converter that converts  the standard 12V to whatever is required for the  instrument.  
Power Budget:  
Planning a power budget is tricky because there  are several uncontrollable variables. The basis is  that the skipper should calculate all of the power  requirements for his boat. A simple spread sheet  is the best way to tackle this issue. I’ve attached  a sheet from the Pacific Cup.  
Virtually all of the power usage figures are  available from the users’ manual or web site for  each piece of equipment. For example, a quick  look at the Raymarine web site indicates that the 



Lighting AH 
0.0




Galley Amps Hours AH/Day Refrigeration 0.0 Prop Solenoid 0.0 Other 0.0 

Galley AH 
0.0




Electronics Amps Hours AH/Day Autopilot 0.0 VHF (receive) 0.0 VHF (transmit) 0.0 SSB (receive) 0.0 SSB (transmit) 0.0 SSB Digital controller 0.0 GPS 0.0 Instruments 0.0 Weather fax receiver 0.0 Radar (standby) 0.0 Radar (transmit) 0.0 AIS 0.0 Energy Monitors 0.0 Stereo 0.0 Computer (screen off) 0.0 Computer (screen on) 0.0 Computer (serial adapter) 0.0 Other 0.0 

Electronics AH 
0.0




Plumbing Amps Hours AH/Day Fresh Water Pump 0.0 Calculate using average water consumption. 
Bilge Pump(s) 0.0 This should be zero unless the boat leaks. 
Other 0.0 

Plumbing AH 
0.0




Inverter Watts Hrs/day AH/Day Microwave 0.0 Chargers (nicad) 0.0 Other 0.0 

Inverter AH 
All values assume inverter efficiency = 85%. 
Power factor may mess up this estimate. 
Gross Energy Consumption AH/Day 
2 Alternative Energy Sources 
0.0



0.0




Device Amps Hrs/day AH/day Solar, avg 0.0 Assumes one large panel. 
Wind, avg 0.0 Assumes AIR Marine wind turbine in good location. 
Water, avg. 0.0 

Contribution of AES AH/Day 
3 Net Energy Consumption, AH/Day 
4 Desired Hours Between Charging 
5 Range of Battery Use 
For example, from 50-85% state of charge. 
6 Recommended Battery Capacity 
7 Alternator Output, Amps 
Target would be 25% flooded, 40% gel, of capacity. 
8 Charge Efficiency Factor 
Gels = 95%, flooded cells = 85% 
9 Minimum Minutes to Charge 
Assumes alternator runs at full output.
0.0



0.0























0.85









Thoughts, Tips, Techniques and Tactics for Singlehanded Sailing  

model AIS 250 has power requirements listed at  200mA. But, when building the spreadsheet the  skipper must remember that some equipment  only works in conjunction with others. For  example, the AIS 250 is designed to work with a  multifunction display which consumes another  250mA.  
The greatest risk in power consumption  calculations is with the auto pilot because this is  by far the leading user of power. An error here  has one hundred times the consequences of an  error in the running lights. The problem being  that the pilots’ consumption is directly related to  weather conditions which are difficult to predict  when building the system. For example, the  B&G T2 hydraulic pump has a power  consumption range from 5 Amps to 22.5 Amps.  Actual power consumption within this range will  depend on the pilot responsiveness required for  the direction of sail (running downwind requires  greater power) and the wind/wave conditions (A  choppy sea will consume much more power than  flat water.)  
Power Generation:  
Given everything mentioned above, the single  best method of meeting power requirements is to  cut power requirements. Reducing power  requirements will reduce cost, reduce problems  and reduce the risk of abandoning a voyage.  Reduce, reduce, reduce, reduce. It’s easy to  remember and it works. After meeting a large  part of the power requirement by eliminating it,  the singlehander can take the next step and  determine which method of power generation is  best for his boat and his sailing.  
Watts, kilowatts, hours: Power is discussed in  terms of Watts or kilowatts or kilowatt hours.  Power (in Watts) is equal to Volts x Amps.  Since we are almost always dealing with 12  Volts, we can often ignore the aspect of Amps  and just work directly with Power.  
The “Watt” is the instantaneous measure. For  example a solar panel with a 40 Watt output  could power a 40 Watt light bulb (assuming no  losses). A kilowatt is equal to 1,000 Watts. A  kilowatt-hour is a constant stream of one  kilowatt for one hour. A solar panel with a 40  Watt output would require 25 hours of sunshine  to generate 1 kilowatt hour of power. A battery  that stores 1 kilowatt hour of usable power  would light ten 100 Watt light bulbs for one  hour. For most batteries, only about 50% of  listed capacity is actually “usable” if one expects  a reasonable battery life.  
Examples:  
• My boat has 130W of solar panels. During a  sunny day at sea I can plan that they will  receive usable sunlight for 9 hours. 130 x 9  = 1,170Wh or approximately 1.2 kWh.  
• An auto pilot requires 5W under easy  conditions and 22W under difficult  
conditions. We might assume an average of  8W during our voyage. Over a day this is 24  x 8 = 192Wh. However this could be as high  
as 22 x 24 = 528Wh over an entire day of  rough seas.  
• A Sea-Me Radar reflector is listed as using  150mA. This is 0.15A, so 0.15A x 12V =  1.8W. Running the Sea-Me for 6 hours  while sleeping will require 1.8 x 6 ≈ 11Wh.  
Batteries: First, it is impossible to “force”  power in to a battery. A battery draws power in,  just like sucking it up a straw. Power can not be  forced in any faster than the battery wants to  draw. A deeply drained battery will draw power  in quickly. A battery that is nearing capacity  will draw power in slowly.  
Power will flow in any direction, from the  highest to the lowest. So the only way to charge  a battery is to supply power at a higher voltage  than what the battery contains. So, for example,  a solar panel may be called “12 Volt”, but this is  the nominal value. In fact it will supply more  than 12V. This is necessary because in order to 

charge a 12V battery, the solar panel must supply  a greater voltage.  
Because a drained battery draws power much  more quickly than a battery near capacity, it is  rarely worthwhile attempting to fill a lead-acid,  GEL or AGM battery all the way to capacity  while at sea. The battery will fill from 50% to  80% much more quickly than it will fill from  80% to 90% or 90% to 95%. That is, it will take  much longer, even in the same sunshine, to get  the battery from 80% to 90%, than it will take to  get it from 50% to 80%. Many skippers will  plug into shore power over extended periods to  get their batteries up to 100%, but only charge to  80% while at sea. It is a more efficient  approach. As will be indicated later, lithium  batteries operate differently.  
Much of the information below is sourced from:  http://www.windsun.com/Batteries/Battery_FAQ.htm    
Internal resistance is the issue. Slower charging  and discharging rates are more efficient. A  battery rated at 180 amp-hours over 6 hours  might be rated at 220 AH at the 20-hour rate, and  260 AH at the 48-hour rate. Much of this loss of  efficiency is due to higher internal resistance at  higher amperage rates - internal resistance is not  a constant - kind of like "the more you push, the  more it pushes back".  
Starting batteries are commonly used to start  and run engines that need a very large current for  a very short time. They have a large number of  thin plates for maximum surface area. The plates  are composed of a lead "sponge", similar in  appearance to a very fine foam sponge. This  gives a large surface area, but if deep cycled, this  sponge will be consumed and fall to the bottom  of the cells. Automotive batteries will generally  fail after 30-150 deep cycles if deep cycled,  while they may last for thousands of cycles in  normal starting use (2-5% discharge).  
Deep cycle batteries are designed to be  discharged down as much as 80% time after  
time, and have much thicker plates. The major  difference between a true deep cycle battery and  others is that the plates are solid lead plates - not  sponge. This gives less surface area, thus less  "instant" power like starting batteries need.  Although these an be cycled down to 20%  charge, the best lifespan vs cost method is to  keep the average cycle at about 50% discharge.  
Marine batteries are usually a hybrid, and fall  between the starting and deep-cycle models. In  the hybrid, the plates may be composed of Lead  sponge, but it is coarser and heavier than that  used in starting batteries. It is often hard to tell  what is in a "marine" battery, but most are a  hybrid. Starting batteries are usually rated at  "CCA", or cold cranking amps, or "MCA",  Marine cranking amps - the same as "CA". Any  battery with the capacity shown in CA or MCA  may or may not be a true deep-cycle battery.  
Plate thickness (of the Positive plate) matters  because of a factor called "positive grid  corrosion". This ranks among the top reasons for  battery failure. The positive (+) plate gets eaten  away gradually over time, so eventually there is  nothing left - it all falls to the bottom as  sediment. Thicker plates are directly related to  longer life, so other things being equal, the  battery with the thickest plates will last the  longest.  
Automotive batteries typically have plates about  .040". The typical golf cart will have plates that  are around .07 to .11" thick. While plate  thickness is not the only factor in how many  deep cycles a battery can take before it dies, it is  the most important one.  
There are several types and technologies for  batteries: The major construction types are  flooded (wet), gelled, and AGM (Absorbed  
Glass Mat). AGM batteries are also sometimes  called "starved electrolyte" or "dry", because the  fiberglass mat is only 95% saturated with  Sulfuric acid and there is no excess liquid. 

Flooded may be standard, with removable caps,  or the so-called "maintenance free" (that means  they are designed to die one week after the  warranty runs out). All gelled are sealed and are  "valve regulated", which means that a tiny valve  keeps a slight positive pressure. Nearly all AGM  batteries are sealed valve regulated (commonly  referred to as "VRLA" - Valve Regulated Lead Acid).  
Flooded: 6V golf cart batteries: What? Golf  cart batteries on a boat? Yes, this is what I use.  I have a pair of Trojan, 240 Amp Hour, 6 Volt  golf cart batteries installed in series to produce  12V. These are standard flooded lead acid  batteries that must be checked and refilled  periodically. I use these for a few reasons, first  they have a very deep cycle, meaning that they  provide a steady stream of power for a long time,  exactly what I need to run an autopilot for hours  or days on end. And they have a high cycle life,  i.e. they can be deeply discharged many times  before replacement. Think about what they were  built for, to run a golf cart through 18 holes,  several times in succession before they are  recharged overnight. The golf course does not  want to replace these batteries every three  months. Second, they are the least expensive of  any type of battery for the amount of power they  supply and they are readily available, from any  battery shop. (I notice that West Marine is  selling the exact same battery under the name  “SeaVolt”). Golf cart batteries are not optimized  to provide “cranking” power required to start an  engine, however they will not be damaged when  used for this. These batteries can spill very  dangerous acid, so must be properly secured in  the boat to survive even a complete knockdown.  
My own experience has shown that they are a  good choice; on the return trip to Hawaii, they  twice ran my autohelm and electronics through  several days of completely overcast conditions  without a blip. I have recently replaced my  batteries after constant use over five years. The  cost of replacing the pair was just over $300.  This is why I would recommend golf cart  
batteries over any other type of standard lead  acid battery.  
Gel batteries have added a silica gel to the  liquid to stop it from sloshing around or spilling.  They are sealed so never need refilling.  However, there are several disadvantages. One is  that they must be charged at a slower rate to  prevent excess gas from damaging the cells.  They cannot be fast charged on a conventional  automotive charger or they may be permanently  damaged. This is not usually a problem with  solar electric systems, but if an auxiliary  generator or inverter bulk charger is used,  current must be limited to the manufacturers’  specifications.  
AGM (absorbed glass mat) batteries infuse the  electrolyte into a fibre mat between the plates.  These have the non-spillable benefits benefit of a  gel battery, without the limitations on charging.  However, AGMs cost 2 to 3 times as much as a  flooded battery with the same capacity.  
A battery "cycle" is one complete discharge and  recharge cycle. It is usually considered to be  discharging from 100% to 20%, and then back to  100%. However, there are often ratings for other  depth of discharge cycles, the most common  ones are 10%, 20%, and 50%. The buyer must be  careful when looking at ratings that list how  many cycles a battery is rated for unless it also  states how far down it is being discharged. For  example, most golf cart batteries are rated for  about 550 cycles to 50% discharge - which  equates to about 2 years.  
Battery life is directly related to how deep the  battery is cycled each time. If a battery is  discharged to 50% every day, it will last about  twice as long as if it is cycled to 80% DOD. If  cycled only 10% DOD, it will last about 5 times  as long as one cycled to 50%. This does not  mean it cannot go to 80% once in a while. It's  just that when designing a system with some idea  of the loads, an average DOD of around 50%  should be considered optimum. Also, there is an 

upper limit - a battery that is continually cycled  5% or less will usually not last as long as one  cycled down 10%. This happens because at very  shallow cycles, the Lead Dioxide tends to build  up in clumps on the the positive plates rather in  an even film.  
Lithium Batteries: Bruce Schwab, who has  sailed his Open 60 around the world twice, has  studied battery power extensively and made  these comments on the new lithium batteries. A  full discussion is available on Youtube.com:  Search for “Bruce Schwab talks about Lithium  marine batteries”:  
No, they’re not for everyone…but  that’s only because they cost a  lot up front. The good news is  that they are relatively new to  the marine market, so the prices  will come down eventually.  However, here is a big point:  over the life of the batteries  they may actually cost LESS per  cycle or per kWh used than  lead/gel/agm. How can that be?  This is because lithium batteries  can be used for 2000-3000 cycles  at 80% DOD (Depth of Discharge)  levels. Compare that to the  typical <400 cycles of an AGM  battery at only 50% DOD.  
Furthermore, as noted above the  last 20% or so of the  
lead/gel/agm capacity is rarely  available while sailing, because  it simply takes too long to  charge  
them all  
the way  
up. With  
a good  
lithium  
system  
they can  
absorb  
charge at  
an  
enormous  
rate.  
How fast?  
Up to “3C” continuous, which  means three times the Ah  
capacity, in amps? For example;  if you had a 360Ah Genasun  lithium system you could charge  it at 900A+ (!) up to 90-95% of  capacity. In reality, no one on  a boat will charge that fast (you  would blow any normal fuses,  anyway) but the point is that the  batteries can take it.  
So, at “normal” fast charging  rates, you can get to 95%+ of  capacity before the voltage goes  up and the current is reduced by  the alternator regulator. What  does this mean? It means that a  full 75%+ of the lithium capacity  is “useable” and in the fast  recharging range, compared to  only 30-35% of lead/gel/agm.  
Ok, so you’ve done your power  budget and you came up with an  average consumption of 10A/hr (at  12V). So you’d like 240Ah @ 12V  of useable power for 24hrs, so  that you only have to charge once  per day. If you have a  
lead/gel/agm you would need a  roughly 720Ah bank to get 252Ah  (35%) of useable capacity to  reach your 24hr target. That  size of lead battery would weigh  as much as 500 lbs, and the  expected life would be 250-500  cycles at 50% DOD.  
With a good lithium system of  360Ah capacity (1/2 of the lead),  you would have 270Ah of useable  capacity at the very conservative  75% capacity use. The system  would weigh about 123 lbs and  have a cycle life of 2000-3000  cycles at 75-80% DOD. That is  about ¼ of the weight, and 4 to 6  times the cycle life.  
Using a Victron Telecom 180Ah  telecom as an example, four of  them (for the 720Ah) would cost  roughly $2350. A Genasun LiFePO4 

(Lithium Iron Phosphate) 360Ah x  12V system retails for $7700. So  that’s 4 to 6 times the cycle  life and ¼ of the weight for  about 3.28 times the price. And  we haven’t mentioned the possible  fuel savings from faster  
recharging (depending on how much  charging power you can pull out  of your engine/generator), and  the reduction of amps actually  used due to less voltage drop  with lithium.  
The BMS modules (circuitry on top  of the battery) do several  things; they measure the voltage  and temperature of the cells and  send the info to the BMS master.  The BMS master then tells the  modules when to shunt off a  little energy (when needed) to  balance the cells with each  other. Once a bank is in balance  the corrections are very very  small, so very little energy is  lost.  
 The better BMS's do balancing  full-time, whenever there is a  voltage difference and either  charging or discharging. Some  simpler ones only shunt/balance  at a set voltage point.  
Oh, that reminds me…did I mention  the reduced voltage drop and the  greater amps in/out efficiency?  Or the lack of “Peukert’s Effect”  with lithium (the loss of  capacity under high loads  exhibited with lead)?  
Creating Power  
Solar  
Panels:  
Here is a  
bold  
statement:  
Solar panels  
are the best  
method of  
generating power – no question. Any other  method should be selected only if solar panels  will not work. Solar panels are the first choice  because they are the simplest possible solution.  No moving parts, nothing to break, nothing to  wear out, nothing to fix – ever. I’ve used my  solar panels for five years without giving a  thought to even the slightest bit of maintenance.  They just keep working. About the only thing  that should be done is an annual current test to  ensure none of the connections are broken and  the panels are still providing maximum power.  A solar panel system only has three parts, the  panels, a charge controller and the batteries.  That’s it.  
Solar panels can be added as required for  particular voyages. I have 40 watts permanently  mounted on the boat to meet all of my normal  requirements fifty weeks a year. I add another  50 watts on a mat for my annual offshore trip,  and another 40 watts hanging off the transom for  longer voyages. With 130 watts Foolish Muse  had no problem sailing to Hawaii and back.  
This system  
is not  
optimally  
mounted.  
The wind  
generator  
and radar  
cast a  
significant  
shadow  
across the  
solar panels.  
In a knockdown the entire framework would be destroyed.  
I believe that for simplicity, the best option is to  have the panels mounted flat on the boat. Other  systems are mounted on a moveable frame that  
allows the panels to be aimed more directly at  the sun. This will generate more power,  particularly in the morning and evening.  However, it does move away from my concept of  maximum simplicity. If the boat has sufficient  solar panels, aiming them at the sun will only  add a small amount of extra charging. Keep in 

mind that we are only trying to get to 80%, so  the extra effort to get to 100% is rarely worth the  effort. Rigid and flexible panels are available,  however rigid panels supply much more power  so are recommended. It is certainly possible to  use several panels to meet the contours of the  boat deck. I use a series of panels, each  measuring 13” x 5”, across the stern of the boat.  This fits the curve very closely.  
Solar panels must be mounted where they have a  clear view of the sky. A shadow covering 1/3 of  the panel reduces its output to zero. Even a  small shadow reduces output significantly. For  this reason the best mounting location is on the  stern or transom of the boat, behind any shadow  from the mainsail or mast. A panel mounted on  the cabin top will be partially shaded all of the  time.  
With a solar panel system, a Charge Controller is  required. A charge controller limits the rate at  which current is added to  
apparent, the generator will output about 40  watts of power. However, if sailing downwind  in the same 5 knots true and 2 knots apparent,  the generator will not produce any power at all.  It has a startup requirement of 5 knots. In  researching wind generators I’ve found a huge  range in power output. In 10 knots of wind  speed, rated power outputs range from 10 to 50  Watts. The skipper is encouraged to research  this carefully. It appears that the modern designs  produce significantly more power than older  models.  
A key consideration is in mounting the unit well  away from any operational area on the boat. I  have seen the photo of an offshore sailor who  was seriously cut by the wind generator blade  while reaching over the transom. The wings on a  typical generator will be 46” or 120 cm across.  They take up a significant amount of room so  must be mounted well above the transom of the  boat. Of course the higher up it is mounted; the  higher is the weight and resistance on the boat.  

batteries to increase the  longevity of the batteries.  A “Maximum Power Point  Tracker” MPPT controller  












In a broach, the wind generator will be the very  first piece of equipment to break. They are built  for air, not water.  
further optimizes the charging to  

I have also found that many generator companies  

provide the optimum voltage when the batteries  are drained, for example after a long night of use.  
Wind Generator:  
Wind generators have become increasingly  popular over the past decade. The have become  more robust and much quieter. Noise has always  been a complaint against wind generators and  noise reduction has been an area of significant  research. This in itself is a reason to closely  examine later models. Prices for typical units  run in the $800 to $1,200 range.  
Of course to function, the wind generator must  be in an apparent wind. So, all else equal, they  will generate much more power sailing up wind  
than down wind. For example, if sailing upwind  in 5 knots of true wind to produce 10 knots  
are no longer in existence. It takes little  investment to start one of these companies on the  boutique level, so there is no guarantee of  longevity.  
A few better known brands are:  
AirBreeze: www.airbreeze.com  
Ampair: www.ampair.com  
KISS: www.kissenergy.com and svhotwire.com  Water Generator:  
There are three types of water generators, fixed,  towed and a hybrid. The fixed units are bolted  directly to the transom and hang below. The  towed units are mounted on the stern rail and  towed behind the boat on a long line. The hybrid  units are towed on a short shaft. The  significance of all water generators is that they 

only depend on boat speed, and not on relative  wind speed. As such, they are just as efficient  moving up or down wind. This is very important  on extended downwind voyages – our greatest  wish. Any type of water generator will create  drag. This is not as important for cruisers, but  obviously significant for racers. The  
significance of the drag will be greater for  smaller boats, i.e. a 20’ boat will notice much  more drag than a 40’ boat. Of course as  described above, these should only be left in the  water for the time necessary to bring the batteries  up to 80% - the most efficient charging period.  
Fixed: Fixed type generators have recently  appeared on the scene. They bolt directly to the  transom of the boat and extend into the water  below.  
They can be  
swung up  
when not in  
use. These  
are being  
used in the  
big Open 60  
singlehanded races. The Watt & Sea model  specifications indicate that it can produce an  astounding 500 Watts of power when traveling at  just 8 knots. There is some drag slowing the  boat, but the rational is that it is less than the  drag of carrying 300 litres of fuel required to  produce the same power with a generator on a  very long voyage. This unit sells for the equally  astounding price of $6,650 for the basic unit.  The racing version is more. Obviously it is  aimed at the serious market.  
Here are some comments Mike Hennessey made  on the Sailing Anarchy forum:  
The cruising version is about  $6,500 USD and the racing version  is about $18,000 USD. The  difference between the two  versions is that the racing has  variable pitch blades that  feather the blades based on boat  speed (e.g. drag minimization)  
while the curising version has  fixed blades. The race version is  also 1 kilo lighter than the  cruising version.  
A good number of Class 40's have  either installed or are going to  install the units. Several  installed them for the Route du  Rhum. In the US, the Atlantic Cup  organizers are encouraging  participants to install the  units, in keeping with their goal  for a green regatta. The Class  40's have all been going with the  cruising version since the drag  that is dealt with by the  variable pitch control starts to  become a real issue at over 12  knots of boats speed, and in a  Class 40 the best way to deal  with that is to simply pivot the  generator out of the water and  wait for slower boat speeds to  charge. The Class 40's tend to  average 9 knots or so, which  makes this a viable choice for  Class 40's.  
The amp budget for my boat is in  the range of 200 amps a day. For  an IMOCA 60 it is not going to be  that much more, just what is used  to cant the keel. The problem  with a 5 amp device is that it  just is not going to make that  much difference for the drag  penalty you pay. And I am still  going to need to haul heavy  deisel fuel around, or a genset,  or a fuel cell. I frankly have a  similar issue with solar panels -  I just don't have enough space on  the deck to have enough panels to  produce enough power that would  make me fossil fuel independent.  
The Watt & Sea unit can do that.  4 to 5 hours of deployment a day  and I pay for my entire amp  budget. Sunny days or shady. And  while it won't help in really  light conditions, I can basically 

count on it any time the boat is  going more than 4 to 5 knots. 
Towed: For  
a true towed  
generator,  
there is  
nothing but  
a propeller  
and shaft at  
the end of a  
30 metre  
line. The line is connected to a generator on the  stern rail. Thus the propeller and line both rotate  all the way up to the rail. This type of unit will  generate about 12 Watts of power for every 1  knot of boat speed. However, to me it seems that  towing a 30 metre rope behind the boat is a lot  like towing a drogue, designed to slow the boat.  There have also been instances of towed units  being eaten by sharks and the rope is prone to  foul in bouncing seas.  
Hybrid: The  
hybrid water  
generator is  
made up of a  
ridged shaft  
and propeller,  
approximately  
8’ long, fixed  
to a generator on the rail. The shaft is gimbaled  to move with the water. The propeller has a  “diving plane” or wing to keep the propeller  below the water. The unit I looked at was rated  for 72 Watts of power at 5 knots of boat speed.  These units claim 30% less drag than the towed  line generators.  
Water generator units often advertise that they  can be mounted vertically with a larger propeller  to capture wind power. However the spec sheets  show that this gives poor generating performance  compared to a dedicated, modern wind  generator.  
Fixed: Watt & Sea: www.wattandsea.com  
Towed: Ampair: www.ampair.com  
Hybrid: Duogen: www.duogen.co.uk  
Power Cells: Power  cells are a new  technology to the  
sailing world. Just a  few years ago they shut  
down when tilted, as  
when sailing to  windward, making them  unusable. However this problem has been  corrected. Power cells are now being used by  top racers in Trans-Atlantic and round-the-world  voyages.  
Power cells use a simple chemical reaction to  produce electricity. Methanol mixes with  oxygen passing through a membrane to release  electrons – thus electricity. A simple, quiet  pump is the only mechanical aspect of the  device. The methanol is used up in the process.  The only byproducts are water and carbon  dioxide (the same amount of CO2 as a person  breathing) so the unit can be used in the cabin.  
A typical power cell will produce about 1.1  kilowatt hours per litre of fuel, making it about  24% less efficient than a gas generator. Power  cells often have automatic on/off functions to  ensure the batteries are always charged. This can  lead to problems if used in conjunction with a  solar panel system, so it is recommended that  they be operated manually.  
Power cells are also considerably more  expensive and use more expensive fuel than a  generator. However, the mechanical simplicity,  reliability and low noise make them a good  choice for sailing in well developed areas where  the fuel is readily available. This would not be  advisable for cruising to the far flung tropical  islands of the world.  
Generators: Small, portable gasoline or diesel  generators have a longer history in sailing. They  are more efficient than a fuel cell, producing 1.5 

kilowatt hours per litre of fuel for a small model  and gasoline or diesel is readily available  worldwide. As a full, working engine,  generators are mechanically complex with many  parts that can wear or break. Generators produce  dangerous  
carbon  
monoxide so  
must not be  
used inside the  
cabin.  
Generators  
claim to be  
quite, but I  
would not want  
to be sleeping  
next to a  
running unit. Generators are known to have  problems when tilted or in very rough seas. The  oil systems are not able to maintain pressure,  shutting them down.  
Yacht Engine: Using the yacht engine is a  common method  
of generating  
power. Racers  
using generators  
or the yacht  
engine speak of  
running the motor  
for one hour every  
eight hours of  
sailing.  
Personally, I find  
this concept unappealing. If I had wanted a  motor running, I’d have bought a cigarette boat  and forget all about the canvas overhead.  
However, those who do use the yacht engine  have worked out methods of increasing the  efficiency of the charging process. Richard Lett,  sailing Velocity Girl, made these comments  (interspaced with notes from two time  circumnavigator Bruce Schwab):  
Most, almost all stock  
alternators are sourced from the  
automotive industry. They are  designed to recharge a starter  battery after starting and to run  lights etc. whilst the engine is  running. All easy stuff  
requiring no great charging  abilities, just a low constant  power drain. Almost the opposite  of what a yacht needs having run  batteries to 50% so and requiring  as quick a recharge as possible.  
In a car, the engine and  
batteries work together. On a  yacht they work separately. This  is where the voltage comes in;  car alternators don't need high  voltage to push in a charge,  because batteries are always  being charged as the engine is  running. A car battery will only  ever be at around 80% charge  MAXIMUM, because it doesn't  matter and the car alternator  doesn’t have the high voltage  output to fill them any further.  It just doesn't matter to a car.  
Now on a yacht what we want are  batteries as near their potential  capacity as possible. When a  battery is flat any alternator  will do because the resistance to  charge in the battery is low, as  the battery fills the resistance  to filling increases (your 6th  pint never goes down as quick as  the first!). It is the voltage  that provides the push. That is  why overhead power cables run at  really high voltages because the  power (amps) has to be pushed for  many miles around a country or  across a continent.  
So car alternators do not have  the voltage to charges batteries  once they get to around 70%. Why  would a car alternator  
manufacturer go to the expense of  building a high voltage  
alternator when it is not  required by the industry? 

Resistance gets really high as  batteries get above 70% or so.  Dedicated charging alternators,  such as Balmar are built with  high voltage regulators to keep  pushing the amps into the  batteries, or you can buy an  after market regulator to improve  the performance of your basic car  type alternator. These still  will not fully charge your  batteries, they will get them to  80% and will charge at a higher  rate for a lot longer than the  car type.  
(Note from Bruce Schwab: Almost any  alternator can output a high  voltage if properly regulated  with an external regulator.  However, the alternator may not  hold up very well under heavy  load and long use. Even the well  known Balmar brand has a  
reputation for overheating and  not putting out their “rated”  amps. There are several brands  that I prefer including Amptech,  Ample Power and American Power.)  
When you read about multi stage  chargers all they are doing is  varying the voltage of the  alternator. They do this when  you have the time and luxury to  charge batteries over many hours,  like leaving on charge in the  garage overnight. They cycle  between high and low voltage to  deal with bulk, trickle and  maintenance phases. When at sea  racing, you don't have time for  all that. What you do is leave  batteries to run all the way  down, whack charge as quick as  you can until batteries get to  around 80% charge, you will see  charge rate drop from around  80amps to around 20 amps. Because  even a high volt alternator  cannot pack charge in quickly to  a nearly full battery that is  seriously resisting being  charged. Quit trying to charge  
once the charge rate drops and  turn the engine off, stop wasting  fuel and making a noise, you are  wasting your efforts.  
Use the battery monitor to tell  when battery voltage has dropped  close to 12v. Start charging.  Watch the battery monitor and see  the charge rate start really high  and drop as the battery fills,  then decide when to stop. For me  charging starts around 90 amps,  once I see the charge rate drop  to around 25 amps, I stop. I  don't even need to check, I just  know the battery is around 80%  full.  
(Note from Bruce Schwab: If you use  your engine as the generator, the  more you can load it up the more  fuel efficient it will be. On  the Open 60 “OceanPlanet” the  29hp engine had a 130A x 24V  alternator (the same as 260A x  12V!). The battery bank was  360Ah x 24V (same as 720Ah x 12V)  of Geltech batteries. With this  system even if there was no sun  for the solar panels, I could get  by on one hour of charging per  day. On good sun days in the  South Atlantic I sometimes went 3  days before needing to charge  with the engine. Having a cutoff  switch for the alternator  regulator (or a “low power” mode)  is essential with such a big  alternator on a small engine.)  
When in marina I leave the boat  charging on a shore powered multi  stage charger, so I start every  voyage with 100% full batteries.  They will never get above 80%  again until back on the shore  charger. Once you know this,  live with it, charge when  necessary, sail for the rest of  the time and enjoy the peace of  knowing you are doing all that is  possible whilst afloat. 

Good quality batteries matter,  AGM batteries, for example, can  take most if not all the charge  an alternator can provide.  Cheaper lead acid types can be  damaged if too many amps are  thrown at them, so a powerful  alternator and efficient charging  systems are wasted. So if you  want to keep charge time to a  minimum, a combination of high  amp output and full charge  acceptance is what you want.  
Batteries are one part of  equation. For offshore I suggest  around 300 amps worth - once  unplugged from shore power and  charging from the engine you will  only recharge to around 80%  (technical reasons for this, but  true whatever claims are made  unless you want to run engine for  long periods of time). This means  that you are running between 50%  and 80% of charge which is @100  amps (on a 300 amp bank) at 5 amp  per hour this gives you up to 20  hrs between charges, or two 60amp  top ups per 24 hrs, which is a  fairy relaxed and stress free  schedule.  
The alternator needs to deliver  its amps at high voltage to push  all that power into the battery.  This is where most factory fitted  alternators come up short. They  only deliver their amps at around  13.7 or so Vs so when they sense  resistance from the battery as it  fills up they start to reduce  output, significantly. You can be  running engine (at whatever revs)  and alternator is only giving you  less than 10amps, you may as well  not bother, unless you like the  sound of the engine. The  solution is either one of the  Adverc systems that regulate the  output of your existing  
alternator to more than 14 Vs or  you buy a marine specific  Alternator like the Balmar that  
is designed to charge at higher  volts. The higher the voltage of  the Alternator the more charge  you get in before the alternator  is defeated by the resistance.  
Next like many I have a clever  battery monitor (only they are  not as clever as they think). It  is meant to count all the amps in  and out. But after a few days it  is wrong and not so helpful.  However the good news is the Volt  meter and Amp meter work very  well and can be used as follows.  Run all systems until your Volt  reading is close to 12 V's which  means batteries are low, then run  engine, Alternator will push out  nearly its whole potential and  drop to below 20amps when battery  reaches close to 80% charge, then  you should stop. You may have  added around 60amps in that first  hour, quit, enjoy the peace.  Extra hours waste fuel, don't  provide much extra amps, charging  twice a day for an hour on a low  battery is very economical and  will provide you with around 120  amps per day or an average of 5  amps per hour. For one more  hours charging you can get up to  8 amps per hour, or you can shut  something down. Re the amp  reading on the battery monitor,  you can use it to see when your  alternator performance has fallen  of a cliff and shut the engine  down - this means battery is up  to 80% charge and the last 20%  could take all day, and isn't  worth the effort. It is because  of the last 20% that shore based  chargers (however clever and  however many stages) take all  night to complete the charge.  
Regarding engine speed - most  pulleys are about 2 to 1 ratio,  so double engine speed to know  what alternator is running at.  Between 1000 - 1400 should be  optimal for most. 

Regarding belts, any alternator  over 100 amps need 2 V belts or a  one of the newer serpentine  belts. 2 belts are never quite  the same length and can be a real  problem to set up. The new  serpentine belts don't slip and  can handle huge outputs. I had  new pulleys made for engine and  alternator at J Class Marine  (Shamrock) for £80. And they  work a treat.  
(Roy Hadland made this comment:  As a marine engineer I often use  pulleys with two, three or even  four belts. We specify that they  must be matched when we place  the order. The company will  ship matched belts that are  exactly the same length. Any  local store should be able to do  the same if asked.)  
Regarding smart chargers for  engine - don't waste your money -  OK if you are cruising and only  have engine to charge batteries,  you can leave engine on all  evening, night or day to handle  the full battery charge; if  racing - just go for the hour  charge on a low battery, accept  you are running on 80% until you  get back home - to charge quickly  you only need good batteries, a  high Voltage Alternator and  patience to wait until batteries  are low to run the engine.  
I run a Balmar 120 alternator,  which still only provides 95 amps  to a flat battery in the real  world, but it does top it up very  quick - as an aside at that  output it gets very hot - to keep  everything happy make sure engine  bay is well ventilated to  dissipate heat - also you need to  start engine at 1400 or so revs,  as when the alternator kicks in  after a minute or so of starting,  if you are on tick over it may  stall your engine! I have fitted  
a switch to disable alternator if  I need full engine power at any  time, they 120 amp can draw up to  20% from my 20 HP Lombardini.  
My initial premise with this section was that the  best method of managing power is to reduce  power requirements. After this, solar panels  should be the primary method of generating  power because of simplicity and reliability.  They offer the greatest benefit with none of the  disadvantages of mechanical systems. I will  stick with these ideas and leave it up to the  skipper to select a secondary source of power, if  one is necessary at all.  

Two methods Bernard Moitessier  used to communicate while single handing around the world. 



Ch. 5: Self Steering Systems  
Shock Cord sailing –for every singlehander:  
I put this first because it is vital for every  singlehander, and if I left it until last most  readers would just skim over it and not learn  these techniques. This information is important  because it is guaranteed that at some point the  autopilot will fail or the windvane will break.  Neither of these pitfalls is an excuse to stop  sailing. I find it ridiculous that a significant  voyage (such as a major Trans Atlantic race  costing hundreds of thousands of dollars)  would be halted because of autopilot failure or  wind vane breakage. These techniques work  perfectly well, are virtually idiot proof and  only require five dollars worth of materials.  
As a second consideration, many crewed boat  racing rules insist that boats not use any type  of autopilot or windvane. Hand steering a boat  by the compass at three in the morning is  extremely difficult, even on a fully crewed  boat. The techniques described below would  not contravene any racing rules because they  work solely by making use of the wind on the  sails and nothing more.  
Although these techniques were developed  many years ago for full keel boats, I have  tested them and found that they work perfectly  well on modern, fin-keel boats. My Olson 30  is considered to be especially twitchy. If the  techniques work on my boat, they are likely to  work most anywhere else.  
I have placed a video of these techniques up  on Youtube.com. Search for “Foolish Muse  self steering” or go to:  
http://tinyurl.com/4tfr2ah  
Upwind steering: Beating into the wind is the  easiest. Simply by lashing the tiller in place  and making some minor adjustments to sail  trim, the boat will continue on its course with  only slight variation. It is amusing that in  
most races, the singlehander will be eating on  upwind legs when the boat can steer itself,  while crewed boats eat on downwind legs  when the boat is flat.  
I recommend against purchasing the store bought tiller locking devices. They are  certainly more expensive and they do not work  nearly as well as my own tiller line that takes  about 5 minutes to create.  
Tiller Line System – for Beating  
This quick “tiller line” method is appropriate  for short term use when beating into the wind,  but will fail in a significant wind shift or  change in wind speed. The approach is taking  a length of line about 3’ shorter than the beam  of the boat at tiller point. Add 1’ of surgical  tubing or shock cord to each end of the line.  Surgical tubing is considered better than shock  cord because it stretches more consistently as  it is extended out. Then add some sort of hook  or carabiner at each end. Attach this to the toe  rail or a cleat on each side of the boat, about 1’  back from the tip of the tiller. It should take a  little tension to wrap the line one time around  the tiller and more tension to wrap the cord  around the tiller twice.  
To use this device, sail the boat by hand until  it is beating perfectly into the wind. The sails  should be trimmed perfectly with the telltales  flying. Wrap the tiller line one time around  
the tip of the tiller. (Two times in higher  winds or even three times in very high wind if  necessary.) The tiller line should have enough  grip to hold the tiller without slipping. Make  sure that the tiller line is holding the tiller  exactly in the same position as hand steering.  This will take some adjustment because the  stretch of the tubing will let the tiller drop.  The beauty of using a stretchy tiller line is that 

it allows for small adjustments by pulling on  the line, without removing it from the tiller.  
Let go of the tiller and watch. Most likely the  boat will round up slowly. When hand  steering, there is a normal tendency to have  more weather helm than necessary, even if the  skipper has read my previous advice about  eliminating pressure on the helm. When the  boat rounds up, ease the mainsheet slightly -  just an inch at a time. It is the mainsail that is  pulling the boat up. As the mainsheet is eased,  at some point the tiller line will do its job and  the boat will sail perfectly on its own.  
This system works because the tiller, held  slightly to windward, is trying to steer the boat  down. Every time the boat sails down, the  mainsail catches the wind and tries to pull the  boat back up again. When the boat heads up  the mainsail will luff and will stop pulling the  boat upwards and the tiller will steer the boat  down again. The boat will be sailing an  elongated S shape through the water, sailing  up and down again. With just a bit of  adjustment this S shape will be eliminated and  the boat will be sailing perfectly straight. A  variation of 5° on either side of straight would  be very well done. The singlehander should  make tiny adjustments to jib and mainsail trim  and tiller position until the perfect combination  is achieved.  
The important part of this technique is DO  NOT tighten the main sheet when the sail  luffs. It is normal when hand steering to  tighten the main sheet when the mainsail luffs.  This would be a very standard reaction. But  when using the tiller line, if the skipper  tightens the main sheet, he will be pulling the  boat up past the point where the tiller line has  control. He will be pulling the boat up past its  normal beating position. The skipper must let  the mainsail luff until the boat falls down  again and the mainsail catches. It requires self  control to allow the mainsail to luff, but it is  important.  
The tiller line system works best in consistent,  moderate winds. When using the tiller line, as  with hand steering, changes to the tiller  position will be required with changes in wind  strength. The tiller must be pulled to  windward as winds increase and dropped to  leeward as winds drop. Otherwise the boat  will quickly sail off in the wrong direction.  Such changes are easily done by slipping the  tiller line’s position over the tiller.  
Long Line System – for Running  
While the singlehander is hand steering  downwind, it is even possible to gybe a  spinnaker by running long lines from the tiller,  to turning blocks on the toe rail on each side of  the boat, up to the foredeck. In moderate  winds, the skipper will be able to walk to the  foredeck and gybe the chute. Any steering  adjustments are made simply by grabbing the  “long lines” on the foredeck. To do this the  skipper must pay close attention to the boat  direction as it can change very quickly. This  means less concentration on the gybe actions.  This will not work in high winds where the  boat can round up in an instant.  
Storm Jib System  
The tiller line system described above only  works when beating into the wind. On a reach  the boat would just round up, so a more  elaborate system is needed. The “storm jib”  system will work from beating close hauled to  a broad reach of around 120º true. It will work  past this point but becomes less reliable.  Additionally, the storm jib system is a long  term solution. It can be used for hours or days  on end in any conditions. Singlehander Tony  Skidmore used this method as his sole means  of self steering on a 17,000 mile voyage in a  24 foot sloop.  
The storm jib system only requires a few feet  of surgical tubing, a storm jib (or stay sail) and  two snatch blocks. The normal jib/genoa and  mainsail are used to drive the boat at speed. 

ind 
Storm Jib System Steering is achieved by changing the  position of the jib and mainsails. 
As the boat turns away from 

the wind, tension on the  
steering sheet decreases, 
turning the boat to windward 
Wrap the storm jib sheet 
around the tiller a few  
times and over itself. 
Use the winch to tension the short  line and tubing

As the boat turns into the wind, tension on the steering sheet increases, turning the  boat to leeward 
Snatch 
Blocks 
Storm Jib 
or Stay Sail 
Steering 
Sheet 
Short 
Line 
Surgical  
Tubing 
To head down, leave the storm jib in position. Ease the sails and  slightly reduce tension on the  short line. 
Short Line 

The steering sheet 
and surgical tubing 
will be under  
strong tension 
This method will  
work down to 
a broad reach 
by further easing 
the sails 
Surgical Tubing 

Thoughts, Tips, Techniques and Tactics for Singlehanded Sailing  

The following steps must all be completed for  the system to work, but I have included them  in this order only for clarity. It will take 5  minutes to set up the boat to use this method.  During this setup time, use the simple “tiller  line” steering method to beat into the wind.  After setting up, lay-off to a beam reach for  the best use of the “storm jib” system.  
Tie 3’ of surgical tubing into a loop and attach  a short line. Run this line through a turning  block on the leeward side of the boat even  with the tip of the tiller and around the leeward  winch. Slip the surgical tubing over the tip of  the tiller. It should be tight enough that it pulls  strongly on the tiller. The line on the winch is  used to adjust the tension of the tubing.  
Take a storm jib or stay sail and attach the tack  to the toe rail or bow cleat on the windward side of the boat, just a foot or two back from  the bow. Use a spinnaker halyard to raise the  storm jib tight. Run a small line, such as a  spinnaker sheet, from the clew of the storm jib  to a block on the windward toe rail near the  shrouds. Run the sheet back through another  block on the windward toe rail even with the  tip of the tiller. Pull tight on the sheet and  wrap it around the tiller just in front of the  surgical tubing. I find that wrapping the sheet  over itself two or three times will hold it in  place securely. The tension on the sheet on the  windward side of the boat should offset the  tension of the tubing on the leeward side.  
The storm jib will be parallel with the boat  centre. As the boat sails downwards, wind  pressure on the storm jib is reduced and the  
surgical tubing pulls the tiller down, bringing  the boat back up. As the boat sails up, wind  pressure on the storm jib increases, and the  sheet pulls the tiller up, sailing the boat back  down again. Use the line from the tubing to  the winch to adjust the tension of the tubing.  Use the sheet and the forward block position to  adjust the tension of the storm jib.  
On the first attempt, pull on the tiller and ease  the main sheet and jib sheet to drop to a beam  reach. IMPORTANT: The storm jib is only  used to keep the boat sailing in a straight line.  It is the jib and mainsail that determine the  direction of the boat. Thus the jib and main  must be properly trimmed for a beam reach.  The storm jib will not override the basic sail  trim. On the first attempt, ease the jib sheet  and main sheet well past the normal sailing  position. Tighten them slowly until the boat  starts to head up. Then ease them again. With  small adjustments the boat can be steered with  amazing accuracy.  
To change course, under normal conditions it  is not necessary to adjust the storm jib or the  tubing. The boat direction will change simply  by adjusting the sail trim in or out. Pull the  sails nearly all the way in to head up to a close  reach. Ease the sails out to lay-off to a broad  reach. I have found this method works well  down to 120º true. At 130º true the system  will still work, but the boat will swing through  wider variation.  
The storm jib and tubing tension will require  adjustment if there is a significant change in  wind strength. Under high winds two loops of  surgical tubing can be used to increase tension.  
The storm jib method works amazingly well in  all conditions and will hold a course better  than most human drivers. It does not require  any power and certainly does not have the  noise of an autopilot. Even those boats with  the most advanced electronic systems should  consider using the storm jib method in open  water.  
Downwind – Poled Out Jib System The “storm jib” system will operate effectively  down to a broad reach. After this point, we  move to the “poled out jib” system. This will  operate all the way down to a dead run at 180º  but it is most effective at 145º. 

d 
in
To sail deeper, leave  
the sails in place.  
Tighten the sheet to  
stretch out the storm  
jib and show more  
sail to the wind. 
To sail higher, leave  
the sails in place.  
Relax the storm jib to  
show less to the wind. 

W
Thoughts, Tips, Techniques and Tactics for Singlehanded Sailing  

This method will only work sailing downwind  with a genoa, not with a spinnaker. A poled  out jib (or poled out storm jib in high winds) is  used the steer the boat.  
Setup in the cockpit is the same as the  previous system. The surgical tubing and  tension line is setup exactly the same on the  leeward side of the boat, although it may  require more tension.  
A jib is raised on the forestay along with the  genoa. The genoa will be on the leeward side  and the jib on the windward side of the boat.  The skipper must interweave the sail hanks to  ensure that both sails are raised to their full  tension. It is probable that the jib is shorter  than the genoa so two halyards will be needed  to raise both sails simultaneously.  
The spinnaker pole or whisker pole is used to  pole the jib out very far forward on the  windward side of the boat. The pole will only  be a foot or two back from the forestay and the  jib will fly well in front of the boat.  
A sheet is run from the clew of the jib back to  a snatch block (or spinnaker sheet block) on  the toe rail on the windward side, even with  the tip of the tiller. The sheet is wrapped  around the tip of the tiller, in front of the  tubing. Even in moderate winds, the sheet will  be under significant tension. It will require  strength to wrap it around the tiller and the  surgical tubing must have sufficient tension to  hold the tiller in the centre of the boat. Under  high winds two loops of surgical tubing can be  used to increase tension.  
In use, as the boat heads up the poled out jib  catches more wind, pulling the tiller to  windward and heading the boat down. As the  boat drops down, the poled out jib sheds wind,  allowing the tubing to pull the tiller down and  head the boat up again.  
Of course the sails must be properly trimmed  for the desired heading. However, with this  
system the poled out jib is used to adjust the  boat heading. If the pole is pulled back about  3’ from the forestay, the boat will drop down  to sail between 170º and 180º. In this case the  genoa will be completely blanketed by the  mainsail so the boat could be sailed with no  genoa at all. As the boat nears 180º, the poled  out jib will collapse allowing the boat to head  up.  
If the pole is eased to about 1’ from the  forestay, the boat will head up to sail between  135º and 145º. In this case the genoa will fill  and the boat will sail at optimum speed.  The entire range of control of the poled out jib  is very small, about three feet in total. Very  small adjustments to the jib sheet will change  the heading.  
In light to moderate winds it is best to use a  poled out jib. In strong winds a poled out  storm jib should be used. I have found it is  unwise to use a storm jib in light or moderate  winds. The reason is that the storm jib must be  stretched out completely to have the desired  effect on steering. Having it completely  stretched out will allow it to continue to have  pull even if the boat is at 180º, risking an  accidental gybe.  
Sheet to Tiller systems: Other methods of  self steering have been developed using either  the jib or the main as the force for the steering  power, rather than a storm jib as described  above, with the same surgical tubing on the  opposite side. These systems require a few  more blocks and lines, but not a storm jib. In  one such system, a line is connected to the  mainsheet midway between the traveler and  the boom, run out to a block on the toe rail and  back to the tiller, with surgical tubing to  provide opposing force. An excellent  description with photographs is provided on  “Augustine – A Pearson Ariel Page” located at  http://solopublications.com/sailariq.htm 


The benefit of this system is that the skipper  need not shift a storm jib from side to side  with each tack. The disadvantage of the  systems is that the large sails are very  powerful and must be carefully balanced.  
For greatest efficiency, any self steering  system should not require either the jib or  main to luff in order for the boat to fall back  into the wind. Obviously allowing a sail to luff  slows the boat down considerably. The benefit  of the storm jib systems is that the storm jib,  used only for steering, luffs. This does not  slow the boat.  
Autopilot or Wind Vane (Note that I use the  generic term “autopilot” because the often  used term “autohelm” is a trademark of  Raymarine)  
This is a longstanding debate among  singlehanders. But in reality, the choice has  already been made; it is just up to the skipper  to determine what type of sailing he will do  and what type of boat he will do it on. Then  the choice becomes obvious.  
Personally, I have a preference for an  electronic autopilot system, for several  reasons:  
Although I dream of long ocean passages, in  reality 51 weeks a year my sailing is made up  
of 3-5 hour trips within 20 miles of my home  club. This leads to maneuvering in relatively  tight waters, i.e. leaving the harbor and raising  the sail under motor power, tacking out of the  bay and up the strait, returning home and  gybing down the strait with all of the  maneuvers reversed, dropping the sails and  returning to my slip. Each of these steps  requires precise boat control and steering. I  estimate that on a typical fun sail, I would  adjust the autopilot 30-40 times, even more  during a race. An autopilot is ideal for this  type of day-to-day sailing. It activates  immediately, adjusts with the push of a button  and provides rapid response. A windvane can  not offer this level of flexibility.  
However, for long passages, the windvane can  easily become the preferred solution. For  example, once into open water on a large lake  or wide strait, it may be three hours between  tacks. On the open ocean it may actually be  several days between course changes. In these  cases the immediate flexibility of the autopilot  is overwhelmed by the mechanical simplicity  and directional reliability of the windvane.  Losing a minute or two during a tack is  unimportant if only done a few times each day.  If heading in one particular wind direction for  several hours at a time, a windvane can hold  that direction very accurately without limit,  with no power draw or noise. An autopilot has  a constant power draw and the unremitting  hum becomes extremely annoying. The  singlehander will learn to despise the sound of  his autopilot below decks. After several days  it can lead to insanity.  
The decision process is also influenced by the  type of boat being sailed. I sail on an  “ultralight” that will surf very easily with the  wind. In these situations the boat takes off  down a wave at nearly the same speed as the  wind. To operate, a windvane must have a  reasonable apparent wind passing over the  boat. If my boat starts to surf, there is virtually  no apparent wind and the windvane will lose 

its grip. This is the reason why modern, ocean  going racing boats always use an electronic  autopilot. They all surf and a windvane  simply will not work.  
On the other hand, a heavy cruising boat will  rarely pick up and surf down a wave. It will  always have apparent wind, regardless of the  
point of sail. A windvane will be effective all  the time.  
As a further consideration, autopilots are rated  depending on the weight of the boat. If  conditions are very rough and winds are very  strong, an autopilot will be overtaxed in  steering a heavy boat. A windvane is set up  for the size of the boat and simply does not  consider displacement as a factor.  
Thus the choice between autopilot and  windvane is already made for the  
singlehander. It depends solely on the type of  boat and the type of sailing to be done. If the  majority of sailing is active maneuvering  within a few hours of the home port, an  autopilot is by far the better choice. If  planning a long ocean voyage, the autopilot is  preferable only for light racing boats. The  windvane is the choice for cruising yachts.  Most long distance sailors do not make a  choice –they take both a wind vane and  autopilot. The autopilot is used when  motoring and in light down wind or beam  reach conditions. It is also useful during sail  changes, tacking or gybing. Otherwise, the  wind vane silently does all the work.  
Tony Gooch is one of my great heroes. In  2002, Tony left the Royal Victoria Yacht Club  on a solo, non-stop circumnavigation. During  his trip he did an in-depth comparison between  windvane and autopilot. Below is an article  written by Tony and published in Cruising  World Magazine in January 2004.  
Albert Takes on Otto 
Offshore Sailing by Tony Gooch.  
In 1995, my wife, Coryn, and I  sold the Arpège 29 we'd sailed  for 16 years, during which time  we'd crossed the Atlantic and  Pacific oceans. In her place,  we bought a 42-foot German built aluminum sloop, named her  Taonui, and proceeded to log  more thousands of miles. Then  in September 2002, I set off on  my attempt to sail solo, non stop around the world, starting  and finishing in British  Columbia. On that voyage,  which I intended to complete as  quickly as I prudently could, I  planned to make extensive use  of an autopilot.  
Based on my experience two  years earlier on a solo voyage  from Cape Town, South Africa,  to England via Cape Horn, I  felt that a good, powerful  autopilot would do a better job  than a windvane, particularly  when running before the  
westerlies in the Southern  Ocean. With this in mind, I  upgraded Taonui's Simrad  autopilot drive unit to the  manufacturer's HDL2000L model.  To drive it, I installed the  latest Simrad. AP22 and J300X  control units, and I also added  the necessary electronics to  enable the AP22 to steer a  course relative to a chosen  apparent-wind direction.  
When we bought Taonui, she had  a Monitor windvane that had  already seen 30,000 sea miles.  Taonui has a long keel, a keel hung rudder, and tiller  steering, and this windvane,  which we affectionately called  Albert, did a fine job of  keeping a steady course in all  manner of seas and winds. I 

have a great regard for Albert,  but without wanting to seem  disloyal after many thousands  of miles, I felt that the  upgraded Simrad autopilot,  nicknamed Otto, achieved longer  daily runs.  
The force of wave action on the  hull and changes in the  
apparent wind will cause a  windvane to steer a course that  weaves from side-to-side. In  theory, because it's set to  follow a chosen compass  
heading, an autopilot steers a  dead-straight course. I even  installed a new RFC 35 fluxgate  compass that would give the  control unit more accurate  information. In fact, of  course, the actual track  steered by the autopilot also  weaves from side-to-side. A  soft key on the new Simrad  control unit allows you to view  the actual course (as distinct  from the chosen course), and I  was surprised at the amount of  yawing it displayed. In the  early days of singlehanded  ocean racing, the boats were  steered by windvanes, but as  the yachts became longer and  faster and able to accelerate  more quickly, the changes in  the apparent wind became too  rapid for a windvane to handle.  Today, these racing machines  regularly hit sustained speeds  of 20 to 30 knots and need  sophisticated  
electric/hydraulic autopilots  acting directly on their  rudderstocks.  
Taonui is 42 feet long and  displaces about 15 tons, fully loaded with her full bilges and  deep, long keel, she's a very  comfortable offshore cruiser,  and Albert can certainly handle  any speeds she's likely to  achieve, even "surfing"  
downwind in a Southern Ocean  
gale. Albert follows the  apparent wind. If I set the  sails for maximum speed for the  wind that's blowing, Albert  will keep Taonui sailing at her  fastest speed for that wind.  The wind rarely blows steadily  from exactly the same  
direction; it always oscillates  five to 10 degrees, and of  course, it's subject to actual  shifts in direction. None of  which troubles Albert. Otto  follows a chosen compass  heading. He doesn't know about  wind shifts, and when they do  occur, the boat will be sailing  at less than its maximum speed.  I felt that when wind  
oscillations are small, these  probably wouldn't have a big  effect, but a 10-degree wind  shift would certainly result in  a loss of speed, which, if I  were asleep, would go unnoticed  until the change in the boat's  motion woke me.  
Under the influence of the wind  and waves, both Albert and Otto  deviate from side to side of  the desired or, in Otto's case,  the selected course. Albert's  deviations are wider, but he  delivers a higher speed. The  objective when passage making  is to maximize the number of  miles made good toward a  selected point.  
So which system is better?  
The Contest  
On a six-month nonstop  
circumnavigation, I had plenty  of time and opportunity to  compare the performances of the  two steering systems. I ran  tests in which I would set  Taonui on a steady course  relative to the wind, with  first the windvane (Albert)  steering for an hour, then with 

Otto the autopilot at the helm  for an hour.  
If the wind strength or  
direction changed, I abandoned  the test and started again. I  wanted to see which steering  system yielded the most miles  made good in an hour in as near  as possible the same wind and  sea conditions. If the wind was  between 38 and 85 degrees  apparent, I set the autopilot  to steer a course relative to  the apparent wind. The  
autopilot can't steer off the  readout of the apparent wind if  it's aft of the beam, so with  the apparent wind between 90  and 180 degrees, I had the  autopilot steer a compass  course. I tracked Taonui's  performance by GPS, and to get  a readout of miles made good to  two decimal places, I set a  course to a waypoint that was  less than 100 miles away.  Before I started the clock  running, I would trim the sails  for maximum speed, then not  touch them for the two hours of  the test.  
Observations  
Although the autopilot steers a  straighter course, in most of  the tests, the windvane yielded  more miles made good. The  windvane reads the small  oscillations in the apparent  wind and adjusts the course to  keep the sails driving at  maximum efficiency. With the  wind aft of the beam, the  autopilot tries to steer a  compass course, and the changes  in the apparent wind result in  the sails performing at less  than maximum efficiency. The  differences are small, but over  a long passage, they do add up:  If my average speed for the  circumnavigation had been 5- percent slower, I would have  
taken 186 days instead of the  actual 177 days.  
With the wind forward of the  beam and the autopilot steering  to a set apparent-wind angle,  there wasn't much to choose  between the autopilot and the  windvane, though it was clear  that the windvane yielded more  miles made good at the smaller  apparent-wind angles. If the  wind was between 85 and 95  degrees apparent, it was better  to set the autopilot on a fixed  compass course, and with this,  the autopilot yielded more  miles made good than the  windvane.  
I also ran a number of tests,  which aren't recorded here, in  which I sailed on a close reach  and close-hauled with Otto  steering a compass course. The  autopilot's inability to "read"  the wind reduced the speed and  miles made good, when compared  to those achieved by the  windvane, by about a third. The  reason for this is that a  windvane acts like a helmsman  and keeps the sails performing  at maximum efficiency by  following the wind as it  oscillates and/or as the boat  rides up and over the waves.  The autopilot tries to force a  fixed course, and the sails are  inevitably luffing or over  trimmed relative to the  
changing wind.  
Bottom Line  
Boats up to about 30 feet can  be steered by an autopilot that  connects directly to the  tiller, and some models of  light-performance autopilots  can be connected to the hub of  a steering wheel. These units  are adequate for motoring, but  they’re not strong enough for 

extensive use offshore. Ocean going boats longer than 30 or  32 feet will typically have an  electric or hydraulic linear drive ram connected to the  rudderstock below decks. This  requires fitting a strong  mounting base, running  
electrical cables, and mounting  control units cost of Taonui's  upgraded Simrad system was  $4,300, not including taxes.  Installation cost only $450  because the mounting place was  built when the boat was  
constructed and we could use  much of the old wiring. To  fabricate and install a  
mounting base, run wiring, and  fit the autopilot components  would take 25 to 30 man-hours  and cost roughly $1,500 to  $2,000, for a total cost of  around $6,000. By contrast, a  new Monitor windvane costs  $3,500 to $3,800, depending on  whether the boat has wheel or  tiller steering, you can fit it  on the stern of almost any  sailboat, and it's a do-it yourself installation. An  autopilot draws a current of 3  to 5 amps, which on most boats  is generated by the engine driven alternator. Most  windvanes are reasonably  bulletproof in construction,  but if something does fail,  they're relatively easy to  repair. The sacrificial tube  between the pendulum strut and  the water vane is designed to  break in the event of a  
collision or excessive load.  It’s easy to replace.  
I had only one such breakage on  this trip. During 110,000 miles  of sailing, Albert's only other  breakages were; a worn out  
bushing, a compression fitting  on the actuator shaft, which as  an easy fix on a drill press  and the loss of the water vane.  Before my first  
circumnavigation, I replaced  the pendulum and every three or  four years I've replaced the  turning blocks for the control  lines. In contrast, a couple of  years ago, a hydraulic seal  broke on my old Simrad, and I  had to return it to the factory  for repair. Since then, I've  carried a spare drive unit  (costing $2,150). An  
autopilot's electronic control  units are usually trouble free,  but if they do fail, they're  black boxes. Aesthetically, a  windvane is more pleasing. It  makes no noise, requires no  feeding, and works in harmony  with the wind and the waves. An  autopilot makes a noise,  requires the running of an  engine or generator to supply  its energy, and uses force to  overcome the pressure of the  wind and the waves. Based on  the tests I ran, a windvane  delivers more miles made good.  On a long passage, this is what  it's all about.  
Having said all this, I would  always carry both an autopilot  and a windvane, if for no other  reason than an autopilot is  needed when motoring. For  shorthanded sailing, it's  essential to have two  
independent self-steering  systems in case one fails. But,  if I could have only one, I'd  choose a windvane for offshore  passage making.  
Using a wind vane 
A wind vane is really only useful in ocean  sailing where you expect to be on the same  point of sail for hours or days. A wind vane  should be thought of as a device to hold a  course relative to the wind, rather than as  means of steering the boat or of changing  course, so it is not used for tacking or gybing.  Before the wind vane is engaged the boat 

should be set on the desired course relative to  the wind and the sails should be set so the boat  is balanced and will steer itself with only a  little pressure on the tiller. The most common  mistake in using a wind vane is carrying too  much mainsail which causes the boat to round  up into the wind. 
Section 4 of the Manual for the Monitor Self steering System sets out the best practices for  using a wind vane on various points of sail.  This excellent manual can be downloaded at  http://www.selfsteer.com/pdfs/MonitorManual .pdf  
A wind vane works best and will out perform  an autopilot when sailing with the wind  forward of the mast in any wind strength. On a  beam reach an autopilot will outperform a  wind vane especially in light winds. In heavy  winds 20 + knots, a wind vane will outperform  an autopilot on a beam reach. In light winds aft  of the mast an autopilot yields higher speed  and distance made good. As the wind  strengthens above 12 knots true the wind vane  is superior. Of course, if the wind shifts the  wind vane follows the wind and speed is  maintained. Under autopilot the boat stays on a  constant compass course (unless driven by a  wind direction sensor) and the boat speed  drops.  
Using a windvane small (say 5 degree) course  changes can be made by changing the angle of  the vane and the set of the sails. For greater  course changes it is best to disengage the vane  from the tiller, steer the boat onto the new  course, adjust the sails as needed, make sure  that the boat is balanced and that there is little  pressure needed on the tiller to maintain  course, then set the angle of the windvane so  that it vertical and then re-connect the lines  from the windvane to the tiller. After this  watch the boat's performance and make small  adjustments as needed. To emphasize an  earlier comment, a windvane can't be used to  steer the boat, i.e. change course. It is a device  
to maintain a chosen course relative to the  wind.  
Autopilots:  
There are several well known manufacturers of  autopilot systems. Some are more prevalent in  Europe and some in North America and they  range in price. I will not attempt to compare  the systems. However I will make these  general statements which should be held as  gospel truth.  
First, every system will break. There is no  question about this. So, just as important as  the initial purchase is the location of repair  service. I am especially lucky that the  Raymarine service centre is exactly half way  between my home and my office – and I walk  to work! A singlehander will not be  interested in waiting three or four weeks for  service when his autopilot breaks during  racing season. A two day turnaround is  invaluable. Before a purchase is made,  carefully search through the manufacturers’  web site to find a local service centre. A quick  phone call will confirm whether service is  actually performed on site or if they are going  to ship it off to the other side of the world. I  also know from experience that it is a good  idea to develop a personal relationship with  the repair technician. It is nice if he knows  you well enough to hand over a completely  new unit rather than wait while he is busy  working on commercial systems costing many  times the price of a small boat autopilot.  
Second, every system will communicate with  common instruments from other manufacturers  via a common protocol such as NMEA. While  this is true, it is significantly less than optimal.  This will be noticed when the autopilot does  not react as quickly as expected with a wind  shift or when a cross wave swings the boat  around. Each manufacturer has developed  their own communications protocol and each  system works best within itself. I recommend 

against mixing instruments from different  manufacturers.  
Third, every system proudly advertises its  “hard over time”, i.e. the time it takes for the  ram to move from inner to outer limit. This is  a useless criteria. I don’t care how fast the  ram will move. Other than while tacking, an  autopilot will never need to move more than a  few inches during even the worst wave  conditions. Infinitely more important is that it  move intelligently. There is nothing more  frustrating than watching the tiller stuck in the  wrong position, and waiting for the autopilot  to figure out what to do. Before making a  purchase, current users should be questioned  about how an autopilot reacts during a  broaching situation, how long it takes to settle  on a new tack, how it sets a course when  activated, etc.  
Fourth, no system will work perfectly right out  of the box. It can take many hours of testing  and adjustment to refine the reactions of the  autopilot to the boat and water conditions. All  systems have a level of intelligence that  “learns” the conditions, but significant changes  must be dialed in by the skipper before the  learning can occur.  
Fifth: Other electronics can impact the auto  pilot or vice versa. It is well known that a  Single Side Band radio uses a tremendous  amount of power when transmitting. Even  VHF radios use significant power. It is  important that any radio wires be kept well  away from auto pilot wires. They should be  run on opposite sides of the boat as much as  possible. This interference can run in both  directions; with the auto pilot disturbing the  radio, or the radio disturbing the auto pilot. I  have even seen instances where the auto pilot  only interfered with the radio on one  frequency band.  
Sixth, sail-trim, sail-trim, sail-trim. Nothing is  more important. No autopilot can override  
poor sail trim. Even a small adjustment to trim  will have a significant impact on pilot  operation, especially with the spinnaker where  things can go bad very quickly.  
Tacking and Gybing using an autopilot:  
Personally, I find that tacking with the  autopilot is much slower and less accurate than  tacking manually, using my knees to control  the tiller while I sheet in. As well, I pause half  way through a tack to pull the jib sheet back  (as described in the chapter on Sailing  Techniques). And even further I find that the  autopilot does not settle on the new tack as  quickly as I would like. During a tack the  autopilot swings the boat over 90º. I find that  it can not do this as accurately as I would like.  For these reasons, I do not use the autopilot to  tack. I can do it much better myself.  However, I know several singlehanders who  do use their autopilots to tack very  
successfully. It is up to each skipper to make  his own decision on this.  
I do use the autopilot to gybe. In this case the  boat swing is only 30º or 40º and the pilot has  no trouble handling this correction. (The  gybing process is described in the chapter on  Sailing Techniques.)  
Remote Control:  
A remote control is invaluable on long  voyages. It enables the skipper to move about  the boat to enjoy the sunshine at the bow, or to  sleep below while retaining control of the  autopilot. A particular annoyance is sleeping  during shifty winds. The wind shift alarm will  sound every time the wind changes by 15º. A  remote transmitter will allow the skipper to  react just by lifting his arm, not getting out of  the bunk.  
The remote transmitter also has a safety  aspect. Most autopilot systems will turn the  boat into the wind or through the wind if the 

skipper falls overboard while wearing the  remote. Of course it would be incredibly  stupid to rely on this instead of wearing a  harness. In a heavy sea, a boat that heaves-too  
30 metres away might as well be 30 miles  away.  
But, remotes also have significant drawbacks  and must be researched. There are two  problems that commonly arise. First, is the  radio range longer than the boat, or will a walk  to the bow trigger the man-overboard safety  protocols? Second, will weak batteries, or  turning the remote off to replace batteries, also  trigger the man-overboard protocols? The  wireless receiver for the remote must be  mounted near the centre of the boat and away  from significant metal objects like an engine.  Third, remotes don’t like to be immersed in  water. If one does get drenched and becomes  inoperable it may be possible to take it apart,  rinse it in fresh water and dry it with the heat  of the engine. This method worked when the  remote on Rain Drop sat submerged in a  cockpit full of water for two minutes.  
There are many debates about who makes the  “best” autopilot. Based on my observations,  there is no clear cut winner. I have seen bitter  complaints made about every system. Without  making any judgments, here are the major  manufacturers of autopilots:  
• Raymarine, Based in the U.S. and popular  in North America (raymarine.com)  
• Navico, The world’s largest marine  electronics company, which owns B&G  and Simrad. (navico.com)  
o B&G, Based in the U.K. and  
popular in Europe. (bandg.com)  
o Simrad, (Simrad-yachting.com)  • NKE, Based in France and very popular in  Europe. (nke-marine-electronics.com)  • Garmin, based in the U.S. Relatively new  to the auto pilot market. (Garmin.com)  • Coursemaster, Based in Australia  (coursemaster.com)  
Wind Vanes:  
Wind vane steering systems are also  manufactured by several companies. In  making a purchase the key issue is that they  unit be built to  
manage the size  
and weight of the  
boat. Wind vanes  
will obviously not  
face the electronic  
failures of  
autopilots, but they  
are still subject to  
breakage. Luckily,  
most units are built  
so that key  
breakable parts are  
simple to replace while underway. Experience  has shown which parts are most likely to break  and singlehanders are advised to carry several  spares.  
With wind vanes, one only hears of  catastrophic failures under the most severe  conditions where the boat has rolled or another  component, such as the boom, mast or a large  solar panel, has dropped on the wind vane.  
Note that the components of a wind vane can  also form the basis of an emergency rudder  system. Most races will accept a wind vane to  meet emergency rudder requirements.  
Scanmar has an off the shelf attachment for  their Monitor wind vane. The “M•RUD”  essentially attaches a small, spare rudder to the  regular wind vane mounting tubes that are  already installed on the boat. Robin Davie  used this system to sail some 2,300 miles in  the Around Alone. It can be used to steer by  hand, with the wind vane itself or with an auto  pilot. The emergency rudder is smaller than  would be required to steer the boat  
aggressively so it might be necessary to reduce  sail, but it will get the skipper back to port. It 




is important to install and test the emergency  rudder system before leaving on a voyage.  
The Scanmar website www.selfsteer.com  discussed the three keys to successful wind  vane steering:  
The Boat  
As different as sail boats are  in appearance, rigging, size,  speed, performance, etc., it is  obvious that the properties of  the yacht will influence the  performance of the vane gear.  Any characteristic that  
contributes to balance and  makes it easy to trim the boat  to stay on course helps the  performance of the vane gear.  Any characteristic that makes  it easy to steer the boat back  on course after a deviation is  positive. Thus moderate size  (30'-55'), moderate  
displacement, moderate keel,  reasonable rudder response and  an easily balanced sail plan  are some important contributing  factors.  
The Operator  
Top windvane performance  requires a balanced boat.  Although true for autopilots  also, vane gears are especially  affected by gross errors in  choice and trim of sails. An  inexperienced skipper can  smother the performance of the  best vane gear.  
Balancing the boat for self steering involves setting  things up so that the boat has  a tendency to stay on the  desired point of sail. If a  wave or a change in the  
strength of wind takes the boat  off course the balance trim  should produce a tendency for  the boat to return to course by  
itself. Through years of  experience we have found that  the common mistake by first  time vane sailors is to over canvas and over-sheet. The  sailors that get the fastest  and best results are those that  have spent some time trying to  balance their boat for self steering without a vane gear  prior to getting one.  
Although a good vane gear can  be quite forgiving the best  performance will be achieved  when the vane is only asked to  make small corrections to keep  a well balanced boat on track.  Usually, the new vane sailor  will find that a bit of  
experience leads to great  improvements. The vane actually  teaches you a lot about sailing  and trimming your boat.  
The Points of Sail  
The particular point of sail is  of importance to the  
performance of a vane gear.  Most boats can be trimmed to  self-steer by themselves when  going hard to weather.  
Consequently, most vane gears  will work well when beating.  Running or reaching are  
trickier. When the boat is  moving downwind its own speed  forward causes a loss of  apparent wind, which weakens  the signals from the air vane  sensor. In light winds they can  become outright erratic as the  air vane gets affected more by  the boat's rolling, than by the  wind.  
A reach can be difficult if the  wind varies a lot in strength.  A hard puff can induce a lot of  weather helm. A temporary lull  can cause a lot of lee helm. In  either case it may require  quite a bit of rudder to keep 

the boat from rounding up or  bearing off.  
As stated, some boats are  easier to balance to overcome  these problems. The operator  can do a lot to minimize them  also. The myth that vane gears  do not steer downwind is simply  not true provided they are  reasonably designed, engineered  and operated.  
Without making any judgments, here are some  manufacturers of wind vane systems:  • Monitor, made in the U.S. by Scanmar.  
Perhaps the best known system worldwide  (selfsteer.com)  
• Voyager, based in Canada.  
(voyagerwindvanes.com)  
• Aries, based in Denmark. (selfsteer.dk)  • Hyrdovane, based in Canada.  
(hydrovane.com)  
Homemade wind vane:  
An entire group has  
sprung up to develop and  
build wind vanes at  
home. The site’s  
founder Walt Murray  
passed away in 2006, but  
the site can be down 
loaded as a zip file from:  
http://tinyurl.com/4mvxpg6  
Numerous designs are  
presented with highly  
detailed plans and  
precise building  
descriptions. Most of  
these could be built by  
any handyman with a  
decent workshop.  
Looking around my  
yacht club, I can see  
several boats fitted with  
homemade wind vanes.  
This is obviously a common approach.  An online forum is also available for any  discussions concerning wind vanes:  http://www.cruisenews.net. 


Chapter 6: Leaving the dock and returning  
Leaving the dock singlehanded is one of the  trickier maneuvers because of tight quarters with  other boats, low motoring speeds that limit  turning ability, and wind that wants to push the  boat in the wrong direction.  
As a first step, the skipper should determine the  prevailing wind direction at the dock and trade  with someone else to get the best possible slip  for a singlehander. There is a considerable  length of time between when letting go of the  final dock line and when the boat starts moving  that it will be at the mercy of the wind. If the  wind is strong, he does not want to be pushed  into another boat that is docked just a few feet  away. It is best if the prevailing winds will push  the boat into the dock. The skipper can set up  fenders to eliminate damage. But he can’t  protect a neighbour’s boat if pushed into it. For  those rare instances when the wind is coming  from another direction, and if the wind is so  strong that there is not sufficient time to motor  out of the slip, he should just ask another boater  to hold the bow until underway. We need not  worry about asking; boaters will offer their help  many more times than we will ever need it. This  is probably the most social time of being a  singlehander.  
Once the boat is moving, a singlehander will not  have any help in fending off other boats, so this  must be done right. When leaving the dock a  boat will be moving at very low speed for the  first 15 seconds, so the skipper needs to figure  out how well the boat maneuvers at low speed.  With an outboard motor, the boat can probably  make a very sharp turn if backing out, but not  moving forwards. With an inboard motor the  opposite might be true. The whole concept of  prop walk must be considered. The difference is  determined by the way the water rushes past the  rudder. A singlehander wants to tie up the boat  (bow in or stern in) so that the greatest low speed  maneuverability is for when he are pulling out,  because this will be the lowest speed. There will  
generally be higher speed when is pulling back  into the slip, because there is more room between  rows of boats than between individual boats in  slips.  
Like most sailors, a singlehander returns to the  same slip on the same dock every day. Perhaps  only a few times a year does he use a different  dock. So it makes sense to set up the slip  perfectly for his boat. He will be using that slip  at least 95% of the time, so he can take the time  to make it really perfect.  
Most sailors hang fenders on the side of the boat,  take those fenders in every time they leave the  dock and set them out again as they return. It  makes more sense to hang the fenders  permanently on the dock. The skipper should  determine the best placement for the fenders,  making sure to think of the worst possible wind  conditions. Set up the fenders so that the boat is  protected from the worst. This way, he can have  absolute confidence and he will have less trouble  sleeping. Also make sure to think about how he  will be coming into the slip under the worst  possible conditions. If the wind is blowing, will  he be forced to slam into the slip faster than he  would prefer? If he thinks about this in  advance, it is very easy to position the fenders  for greatest protection. He only needs fenders on  the dock side. If he follows the steps properly,  he should not need fenders on the other side, to  protect against other boats.  
Again, most sailors keep their docking lines on  the boat, pull them off the dock when they leave  and run them back to the dock when they return.  It is better to tie the lines permanently to the  dock and drop them off the boat as he departs.  The key reason for this is that the skipper can  have them fitted exactly to hold the boat in the  best position. He will never need to make  adjustment to the length of the line and will  know that they are perfectly set.  
As well, he doesn’t need to worry about spring  lines. He just needs one line, set in a V, for the 

bow and  
another for  
the stern.  
The top of  
the V is tied  
to two points  
on the dock,  
about ten feet  
apart. The  
point of the  
V is a loop,  
just big  
enough to  
slip over the  
cleat on the  
boat. A loop about 6” across is probably the  right size. When setting up the V lines, make  sure they hold the boat in the correct position,  where it won’t bash the dock in front and won’t  hit the neighbour’s boat. Adjust the length of  the stern V line so that it will stop the boat  before it hits the dock. The skipper will be  grabbing the stern V line as he returns to dock.  Next, set the length of the bow V line such that if  the wind is pushing the boat forward or  backward, the tension on both V lines is the  same. We don’t want one V line holding the  boat. I know for a fact that this method will hold  a boat very securely in all conditions. Our docks  have seen 40 knots of wind and my boat has not  slipped its lines.  
As the skipper leaves the dock, he should  remove the loop from the bow cleat and toss the  line neatly on the dock. Then walk back to the  stern cleat and remove the loop, pulling strongly  on the stern V line to start moving. Then he  should toss the line on the dock and put the boat  in gear. This is the easiest way to get the boat  moving up to maneuverable speed.  
When returning to the dock, the skipper should  use a boathook to snag the stern line off the dock  as he passes by, and slip it over the stern cleat.  The line should be just the right length that when  secure to the stern cleat, he will know that the  boat will stop exactly where he wants it. He  
wants to be able to slip it on and forget it  because he will be busy at bow cleat. Once  again, use the boathook to grab the line and slip  the loop over the bow cleat.  
Another singlehander has installed a hook on a  piling at the entrance to the slip. He drapes the  dock lines over the hook when pulling away. To  make it convenient when returning.  

Sails on and ready to go  
An important consideration to singlehanding is  that the skipper must always be prepared with an  instant backup plan for operating the boat. He  must never leave the dock under motor power  without at least one sail hanked on and ready to  raise at a moment’s notice. This could be the  main or jib, it does not matter which, so long as  he can raise that sail in less than 15 seconds.  Likewise, when returning to the slip he should  never pack away all of the sails until he is tied up  at the dock.  
Experience has proven, time and time again, that  the motor is the single most unreliable piece of  equipment on a sailboat. I can guarantee that the  motor will quit at absolutely the worst possible  moment. The singlehander must be prepared for  this. Think about it now, what would be the  worst possible moment for the motor to quit?  My motor quit when I was returning to the dock  in 20 knots of wind and less than 50 feet from  the rock breakwater. The list of things that can  go wrong with the motor is endless, but here are  a few of the reasons my 2-stroke outboard has 

quit at terrible moments: dirty spark plug, bad  oil/gas mixture, small hole in the rubber fuel line  allowing air in, rope in the propeller, out of gas,  gas tank tilted on its side, cracked fuel line  connector. After the first edition of this book, I  was motoring inside the harbour in 15 knots of  wind. When I shifted from reverse to forward,  the motor bracket broke off the transom,  dropping my 5hp outboard into the water.  Luckily I had a safety line in place. I  immediately raised my jib and sailed out of the  harbour, dragging the motor behind.  
When the motor quits, DO NOT attempt to  restart it. There is a reason that it quit and it will  take more than 30 seconds to figure it out. When  the motor quits, if outside the docks, the first  thought must be to raise a sail immediately and  regain control of the boat. Once there is a sail  up and drawing, the skipper can take all the time  in the world to work on the motor. This is the  reason why a singlehander must never leave the  slip or return to the slip without a sail hanked on  and ready to raise. I have watched inexperienced  sailors pulling frantically on their starter cord as  they drift into rocks. They would have been  much better to raise a sail and regain control.  
When the motor quits inside the docks, the  skipper might not have the room needed to raise  sail and gain speed. This is where he will gain a  new understanding of how boat hulls are built.  The boat hull is a lot stronger than most think.  Most sailors think of fiberglass boats the same  way as they think of metal cars. But this is  wrong. A car will have a permanent dent for  every small contact. A fiberglass boat is much  stronger and much more forgiving than metal A  few years ago I motored into a dock far too fast  because a strong wind was pushing from behind.  I chose the lesser of two evils and deliberately  ran my boat into the dock rather than hit another  boat. My bow broke a wooden 4x4 in half, but  there was nothing more than a scratch in the gel  coat on my boat. So, when the motor quits and  the skipper can’t raise sail, he shouldn’t be afraid  to run the boat into a wooden dock, either on the  
bow or on the side. I’ve done both several times  and do not have any lasting scars. It is  emotionally difficult the first time, but after a  while I’ve learned to shrug it off.  
Running a boat into other boats takes a lot more  nerve, but it will happen, so be prepared. First,  what can the skipper do to slow down? He is  probably going very slowly in any case. Can he  turn into the wind until almost stopped? When  he hits another boat, it is not the initial contact  that causes most damage. It is one boat sliding  along another where the lifelines, push pits and  pulpits get caught or the masts and shrouds get  tangled. The key is to stop the boat from moving  after the initial contact. He should grab the rails  or lifelines on the other boat and hang on until  things settle down. Tie the boats together so  there is no movement. Only after he has got the  motion stopped can he make better decisions  about solving the initial problem. I will warn  that although the singlehander knows that  fiberglass is strong and forgiving, the owner of  the other boat does not. He is still thinking of  his boat like a car, so he might get excited over  what we consider to be run-of-the-mill.  
If the boat is moving towards a collision, the  skipper should not try to stop it using his own  brute strength. I’m not saying this because I’m  worried about his safety. I’m saying this  because I know that it won’t work. A 10,000 lb  boat at 4 knots has a lot of inertia. No one has  the strength to stop it from going where it wants  to go. I’ve proven that even a wooden 4x4  doesn’t have the strength. Fortunately, an entire  wooden dock does have the strength so this is  really the only choice.  
With a full crew on board, we have four other  sailors who can fend a off of rocks or boats. But  singlehanders do not have this ability, so they  should not try to do what they can’t do. Just live  with what they can do and be thankful for  insurance. 

Anchoring: The idea is to do as much as  possible from the cockpit where the skipper has  full control of the boat, only moving to the bow  at the last possible moment. Under sail in light  winds, or if using a motor, the skipper should  turn the boat into the wind and release the  halyard to drop the foresail or put the motor into  neutral, then walk to the bow and release the  anchor while the boat drifts backwards. In  stronger wind conditions, it is better to heave too. When the boat has nearly stopped, the  anchor can be dropped. This will mean sailing  past the desired anchor position and turning back  to heave-too. After the anchor is dropped, the  boat will swing around into the wind.  
Another method is to bring the anchor and chain  back to the cockpit to drop over the side. This  can get messy with a dirty/rusty anchor. It is  necessary to bring the entire anchor and chain  back, or else the chain will scrape along the boat  rail.  
The singlehander must remember to keep the  boat under control at all times, especially in a  tight anchorage. The best way to keep the boat  under control is to have the sails actively  working, even if hove-too. A sailor has no  control over a boat that is drifting. Only with  wind in the sails can the boat be maneuvered.  
Mooring buoys  
Attach a ten foot line to the mooring buoy with a  4” ring and pickup float on the end. Use a boat  hook to grab the pickup line as the boat passes  by. A mooring line from the bow of the boat  should be run outside the lifelines, all the way  back to the cockpit. At the end of the mooring  line, a carabiner can be easily clipped to the ring.  Once the boat has settled, the mooring line can  be hauled in to the bow and the carabiner  replaced with a strong line.  
Climbing the mast  
There are a myriad of ways to a singlehander to  climb the mast, but three have proven to be more  
successful than any others. Mastclimber;  Ascender and Grigri; Mast Steps.  
Mastclimber: Manufactured by ATN Inc. the  Mastclimber is a combination of bosun’s chair  and climbing system that allows a user to climb  up a single halyard. A foot strap system is used  
to so that the skipper pushes up with both legs to  advance up the halyard about 1’ per push. A  one-way jammer on the bosun’s chair and  another jammer on the foot strap are used to  advance securely up the mast. A complete  description and video is available at atninc.com.  
The user should not allow the two jammers to  come together  
as they literally  
can jam and  
need to be  
pushed apart.  
They should be  
kept separate.  
This can  
become an issue  
when  
descending  
quickly. It  
might be better  
to use two  
halyards – one  
for each  
jammer. A second problem when descending is  in dropping the feet too far. This makes it  difficult to stand up enough necessary to release  the bosun’s chair jammer to proceed. So the user  must raise the feet back up a few inches. The  best aspects of the Mastclimber are the comfort  of sitting in a bosun’s chair and the ability to  work well above the mast head.  
Ascender and Grigri: The beauty of this  system is that it allows for rapid descent. It is  just as fast when ascending but much faster  descending as the two jammers used with the  Mastclimber or with two mountain climbing  ascenders. The singlehander should visit a  reputable mounting climbing shop to purchase an 

Ascender, a Grigri and a harness. It is necessary  to make a foot harness using strong webbing  material and strong thread. The skipper must  learn how to use this gear from a qualified  expert. I prefer to use two halyards (one for the  ascender and one for the Grigri) however it is  possible using only one halyard if necessary. In  this case the  
climber must keep  
the ascender and  
Grigri from  
connecting, in  
which case they  
will bind up. Of  
course the  
halyards must be  
very well secured  
with everything  
available. I use both the halyard clutches and  winches. I use a two-foot harness that I made  myself, very similar to that shown for the  Mastclimber product. A padded mountain  climbing harness is recommended. When  climbing, the feet can be spread around the mast,  as shown in the photo below.  
To descend, the user can slide the ascender well  down its halyard, step out of the foot straps and  pull the Grigri handle and rappel to the deck  quickly and under control.  
Both of the above methods can be used at the  dock or underway. The static line (for the  ascender)  
must be kept  
very tight,  
but when  
underway  
the user will  
still swing  
away from  
the mast.  
Thus, I find  
it better to  
sail with  
only a jib,  
and to drop the mainsail altogether. This allows  me to wrap a safety line, and my arms, around  the mast. The singlehander should wear his  normal harness with a much shorter tether strung  around the mast. This extra line will keep him  from swinging wildly away from the mast in a  strong gust of wind. It will be necessary to  disconnect to pass the spreaders. It will also stop  him from falling past the spreaders if the  climbing gear fails. I find it very helpful to wrap  one arm around the mast when pulling up on the  Grigri.  
Blake’s Hitch 
There are several knots available to replace the  mechanical climbing devices. The best known is  the Prusik Loop.  
However, I find that it  
binds when holding my  
weight. A better method  
is “Blake’s Hitch”. It  
does not bind or roll over  
on itself under weight. A  
pair of lines tied in this  
way can be used to climb  
a pair of halyards. One is  
tied to the climbing  
harness and the other to  
the foot straps.  
http://tinyurl.com/lzq8jm  
During the 2002 Around Alone, UK skipper  Emma Richards had an extreme adventure at the  top of her 80 foot mast after her main halyard  parted at the mast head. Here is an excerpt from  thedailysail.com, November 8, 2002:  
She set off up the mast at 8:30am  GMT in 10 knots of wind. But by  the time she was at the mast  head, the wind had built to 25  knots and the mast was swinging  back and forth, 20 feet either  way. Making the repair became a  seemingly impossible task in  these conditions. Emma, however,  showed her true mettle by  completing the repair  
successfully and after four and a 

half hours, set foot back on the  deck of Pindar at 12:52 pm GMT.  
Commenting on the trip up the rig  Emma commented: “It was horrible,  just horrible – the most  
terrifying experience of my life.  I went up the mast with a fairly  steady breeze of 10 knots, but by  

the time I’d reached the top,  this has built to 25 knots, with  the wind constantly shifting  direction. The mast was swinging  back and forth, as much as 20- feet either side. I was blown  upside down in my climbing  harness, back to front and thrown  all over the place. I am bruised  all over from being pounded  against the mast – all up my  arms, all along my ribs and my  legs are totally battered. My  head smashed against the mast a  few times, so thank god I was  wearing a crash helmet. I was so  scared, it is definitely the  hardest thing I’ve ever had to do  in my life, let alone my sailing  career. It was a total horror show.”  
Mast Steps: Mast steps are common on cruising  boats but are considered to add unacceptable  weight and wind resistance to racers. Steps are  undoubtedly the fastest way up and down the  mast. Of course a safety harness is a must.  
Fixed, folding or removable mast steps are  available. The newest folding models are  manufactured from a nylon / glass fibre.  
Jeanne Socrates’ Nereida uses folding steps near  the working areas at the base of the mast, and  fixed steps further up.  
Simplicity and ease of use are the greatest  benefits of mast steps. Going up the mast with  mounting climbing gear is not something I  would do for fun. Here is an excerpt from Dave  Abbott, referencing the adventures chronicled at  maxingout.com:  
Why do I  
consider mast  
steps to be  
essential  
cruising gear  
on our cat?  
1. Mast steps  
keep me  
honest:  
Sailing  
offshore  
isn't a place  
where you should ever live in  denial. When you don't pay  attention to what is happening on  your yacht and around your yacht,  you have set your course for  denial, and denial comes before  disaster.  
Mast steps keep me honest about  what is happening to my rigging.  Every time that I prepare to sail  offshore, I climb the mast and  inspect every piece of rigging.  Because of my due diligence in  making rigging inspections, I  made it all the way around with  world without any rigging  disasters.  
When I reached Bora Bora, I  climbed my mast and found two  diamond stays that had broken  wire strands and needed  
replacement. During our five 

year sojourn in the South  Pacific, New Zealand and  
Australia, I discovered and  replaced diamond stays that had  one or two broken strands of  wire. In Turkey, I climbed the  mast and discovered a broken wire  strand on an upper diamond stay.  When I reached Gibralter, I  discovered that my head stay had  several broken wire strands, and  I replaced my head stay. The  only pieces of rigging that I  didn’t replace during our eleven  year circumnavigation was our cap  shrouds. They are still alive  and well fourteen years later.  
My mast steps made it easy to  inspect the rig before every  offshore passage. Every time I  looked at those mast steps, I  felt guilty of neglecting my rig  until I climbed to the top of the  mast and verified that everything  was in order. There's no doubt  about it. My mast steps kept me  honest.  
2. My mast steps kept me safe: I  always wanted to have a crow's  nest on board Exit Only. But it  was too expensive, and the  diamond stays made designing one  a real challenge. On the other  hand, my lower spreaders were at  an excellent height and  
functioned nicely as a makeshift  crow's nest. My son would zip up  those mast steps and have a look  all around as we sailed through  
passes, into atolls, and among  the coral heads of Fiji, the  Tuamotus, Suvarov, the Bahamas,  the Caribbean, the Great Barrier  Reef, and many other destinations  around the world.  
Having someone up the mast pushes  the odds in your favor when you  are sailing to coral  
destinations. Mast steps make it  easy to do what you should do -  go aloft and have a look around.  
Folding the headsail: When using hanks, it is  easy to fold the jib/genoa for storage after a sail.  Leave the sail hanked onto the forestay. Starting  from the clew (back corner) of the sail, flake it  back and  
forth while  
moving  
forward  
until the  
the sail is  
laid out in  
a neat,  
narrow  
line.  
Starting from the back again, fold the sail over  three or four times until it is in a neat pack. (Do  not attempt to flake the sail with the exact same  folds every time as this will cause wear creases.)  Remove the hanks from the forestay and insert  the sail into a bag from the back first. In this  position, the skipper knows that he can dump the  sail on the deck and the hanks will be neatly  ready to clip onto the forestay once again. In  high winds, most of the sail can be kept in the  bag until it is completely hanked on.  
Next Page:  
The picture on the next page was taken at the  start of the Singlehanded Transpac, passing  under the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco.  I sent the picture to the solar panel company, and  they put me in their calendar. 

Thoughts, Tips, Techniques and Tactics for Singlehanded Sailing  

Chapter 7: Sailing Techniques  
With this book I’m assuming that the reader has  a basic understanding of how to sail a boat and  the terminology used in this sport. I will  concentrate on those sailing skills particular to  singlehanding. I have developed these  techniques through trial and error (many, many  errors), after years on the water and hundreds of  sailing trips. I have always looked for two  criteria in these techniques: the least chance of  an error or accident happening; the fastest and  most efficient means of achieving the goal.  
Understanding sail trim  
The first premise is that the sails and the rudder  on a boat, when working in combination, are  highly effective brakes, designed to slow the  boat down or stop it completely. Only if the  sails and rudder are perfectly trimmed will the  boat sail as it is designed. The vast majority of  recreational skippers sail with one foot on the  brake. The one thing an educated skipper learns  is how to take his foot off the brake. Doing so  will increase sailing speed, reduce work effort  and increase overall enjoyment.  
The most obvious brake is the rudder. This  brake is applied every time the rudder is turned,  even a little bit. A professional racer told me  that they prefer 2º of weather helm. I smiled  when replying that 2º is far too much, 1½º is  better. “Weather helm” is pressure pulling the  tiller downwards, attempting to point the boat  upwards. “Lee helm” is pressure pulling the  tiller upwards, attempting to point the boat  down.  
The hand on the tiller should be as light as the  hand of a lover during Chopin’s finest waltz. It  is used to guide with mere thought. Any  pressure should be nothing more than the blush  that arises from whispered sweet nothings. Like  the lovers hand, the tiller should be little more  than floating.  
Pressure on the tiller should be the absolute  minimum required to sail in the desired  direction. The skipper must be always  conscious of the amount of pressure on the tiller.  The only way to sail with speed is too eliminate  this pressure. When hand steering, it is very  simple for the skipper to feel the amount of  pressure. A celebrity sailor once commented  that she preferred a wheel because she was not  strong enough to sail with a tiller. My  immediate reaction is that if steering with a tiller  takes more strength than a middle aged woman  can easily manage, then she is doing it wrong.  Using a tiller takes no strength at all. If done  properly, a two year old child would have  enough strength - I can’t make it any clearer.  
When sailing with the auto pilot, the  
singlehander should stand forward and actually  look at the tiller. Just how far from centre is it?  With an auto pilot it would be very easy to allow  it to expend effort untenable with manual sailing.  By watching the tiller the skipper can quickly  judge the amount of pressure. The tiller should  not be more than a few degrees off centre.  
Sail trim is more important for a singlehander  than for a crewed boat because bad sail trim will  create extra work (and excess wear and power  consumption) on any autopilot or will simply  overwhelm any wind vane or storm jib steering  system.  
The only way for the singlehander to control  pressure on the tiller is with proper sail trim.  Sails that are trimmed too tightly are incredibly  slow. Weather helm comes from too much  pressure on the mainsail or on the trailing edge  of a large genoa. Lee helm comes commonly  from too much spinnaker, or more rarely from  too much genoa.  
To reduce weather helm the singlehander should  reduce sail behind the mast or increase sail at the  front of the mast. Proper sail balance is the key.  Most commonly, weather helm is reduced by  
easing the main sheet. As winds build this may 

mean easing the main sheet until the mainsail is  just short of flogging. It is very normal to sail  with a reverse bulge in the front third of the  mainsail, caused by the wind from the genoa  through the slot between the genoa and the main.  The trailing edge of the genoa can also cause  weather helm. Easing the genoa sheet will  reduce this problem. Weather helm would also  exist in the ridiculous situation of using a large  main with a storm jib or no jib at all in moderate  wind conditions. As mentioned previously, sail  balance is the key.  
Lee helm can occur on a deep run, with the  spinnaker pole pulled well back and  
perpendicular to the wind. To reduce lee helm  the singlehander should reduce sail at the front of  the boat or increase sail at the rear of the boat. If  possible, easing the spinnaker sheet will reduce  lee helm. If winds are strong, it may not be  possible to ease the sheet enough without  flogging the spinnaker. To retain maximum  speed a better solution may be to tighten the  main sheet and pull the main in a few feet. I.e.  tightening the main sheet to increase weather  helm will counteract the lee helm caused by too  much spinnaker.  
The best reference book on sail trim that I’ve  found is published by North Sails. The “North  University Sail Trim” book is specifically  designed for racing. The advice it gives is a  must for any sailor and particularly for a  singlehander. But a skipper should not just  blindly follow the book’s directions. Rather it  should be used as a starting point for the  skipper’s own experiments.  
Even today, after years of sailing and many trips,  I still experiment with sail trim. Just yesterday I  learned the effect of pulling the spinnaker pole  down by six inches on a beam reach in 12 knots  of wind. What did it do to my sail shape and,  most importantly what did it do to boat speed?  
Every skipper should try new things every time  he leaves the dock. What happens if the  
backstay is tightened by two inches in 10 knots  of wind? What happens if it is tightened two  more inches? While the North University book  is excellent, it can only provide the general  advice that is applicable to all boats. It can not  provide the specific advice needed for one  specific 24 year old boat with eight year old  sails. This can only be discovered by  experimentation. I’ll give a hint right now:  tightening the back stay by the first two inches  will increase speed; tightening it by two more  inches will reduce speed! (At least on my boat.)  
The skipper should always keep one eye on the  knot meter. I consider the knot meter to be the  most important piece of electronic equipment on  the boat, because it is the only thing that will  indicate if the boat is being well sailed. A  skipper who is new to this concept will be  amazed by the change in boat speed just by  easing the main sheet one inch, or by what  happens to boat speed if the outhaul is pulled  slightly tighter.  
When watching boat speed, it is better to think in  terms of percentage rather than absolute value.  A half knot speed increase may seem  insignificant until it is understood that this  represents 8% for a boat traveling at 6 knots.  Think about cars on a highway. One car  traveling at 100kph would seem darned slow to  another car traveling at 108kph. Even better,  think about NASCAR racing. In a typical 300  mile race the first two cars will finish 1/3 second  apart. This is just 0.02%, but is a difference of  $35,000 in winnings! A typical sailor will not  concern himself with 0.02%, but 8% is huge.  Keep one eye on the knot meter and constantly  experiment with sail trim.  
Sailing upwind 
Upwind sailing is where a singlehander faces his  greatest disadvantage for the simple reason that  he lacks weight on the rail. Most club racing  boats are designed to have 1,000 lbs of crew on  the rail. Weight on the rail keeps the boat level 

which shows more sail to the wind. But more  importantly, a level boat means the keel is  pointing straight down, so the “wing effect” of  the keel is at its maximum. The keel helps to  keep the boat pointing upwind. The impact of  this is dramatic. In races with a 20 knot breeze,  I’ve fallen off the course by 30 yards over a run  of just 150 yards when compared to other boats.  It’s bloody depressing.  
The “wing effect” is that the keel provides lift to  the boat, pushing it to windward, just like the  wing on an airplane pushes the plane upwards.  Actually, the keel does not lift the boat to  windward, but rather stops it from drifting  further to leeward. Although a keel is  symmetrical, unlike the wing on an airplane, the  fact that the boat is slipping slightly to leeward  gives the difference in water speed on both sides  of the keel that are needed for lift. In an ideal  world, the keel will be pointing straight down,  giving the maximum lift. In the singlehanders  world, the keel is tilted at a 45º angle, providing  virtually no lift at all.  
The amount of heal is deceptive. To the  skipper’s eye, it may look as if he is not heeling  any more than other boats. But even a 15%  difference in heal will have a dramatic impact on  leeway. New boaters incorrectly think that a  boat that is heeled is action packed and fast. Just  the opposite it true. A boat that is flat is much  faster than a boat that is over heeled. They are  designed that way.  
On purposely designed singlehanded boats,  major steps are taken to reduce heal by adding  massive water ballast tanks to each side of the  boat or a swinging keel that is pulled to  windward. In addition, large dagger boards are  often added. These dagger board wings point  straight down when the boat is healed. The wing  effect more than offsets the extra drag from the  dagger boards themselves. For the typical boat,  these additions are not available, so the  singlehander must move to more conventional  means of leveling the boat.  
In the short term, sail twist is the singlehanders  best friend. Mainsail twist is added by keeping  the traveler high while easing the main sheet.  Thus the top of the sail is twisted away, spilling  a large amount of winds. In the same manner,  jib twist is added by keeping the jib lead forward  while easing the jib sheet. For best sail balance  both the main and jib should be twisted the same  amount. Twisting one without the other will add  pressure to the helm. Twisting the sails is the  fastest way to reduce boat heel.  
Twist, evenly spread  
between the main and jib. 
Tension on the luff and foot of the mainsail and  jib performs the same function as the gears on a  car. First gear on a car (more power but less  speed) is attained by having a loose sail luff and  foot with a large bulge in the sail. This setting is  useful when accelerating after a tack or in  choppy water conditions where the boat is  constantly attempting to regain speed off of each  wave.  
Fourth gear in a car (more speed but less power)  is attained by having a very tight luff and foot on  the sail. This is appropriate after full boat speed  
has been attained in smooth water. A tight luff  and foot is also used to shed excess wind, once  again to reduce boat heel. In high winds it is  normal to have the foot of the sail very tight,  even if the sail is reefed. To do this I’ll remove  the mainsail outhaul from the bottom clew and  connect it to the reef point clew and pull hard to  flatten the sail as much as possible.  

Second and third gears are the sail positions in  between first and fourth. I find it useful to think  of my sail settings in terms of gears. If I say to  myself “first gear,” I know exactly where my  settings should be.  
With a highly skilled crew it is common for the  sail luff tension, adjusted with the backstay and  foot tension, adjusted with the outhaul on the  main and car on the jib, to be worked constantly  while sailing. But a singlehander is unlikely to  be constantly making adjustments to luff and  foot tension after each tack or between waves. A  singlehander is more likely to look at the general  water conditions over the next half hour and  adjust the luff and foot tension accordingly. It  would be extremely taxing and nearly impossible  for a singlehander to adjust the backstay tension  before and after each tack. This is commonly  done on crewed boats.  
In the long run, the negative effect of heel is so  great as to override the impact of shortening sail.  So a singlehander will shorten from a genoa to a  jib or reef the main much earlier than a crewed  boat. Without other boats to compare, a  singlehander may think that he is moving as fast  Two reefs and a  
storm jib keep the  
boat level in gale  
force winds.  
Photo by Andrew Madding 
as possible. But in a group, the skipper will  quickly realize how much leeway he is suffering  without a crew on the rail. In typical races, the  
only step to take is reducing sail and bringing the  boat back upright. Reducing sail will often  increase the VMG (velocity made good) to the  next waypoint.  
In high, gusting winds, reducing sail will not  reduce speed at all. This situation arises if a  boat is sailing on the edge of control, where it is  swinging back and forth with varying amounts of  heel. It is just as fast and certainly more  controllable to reduce sail to the point where the  amount of heel is stable, rather than varying  wildly.  
In upwind sailing there are only two issues that  the skipper must monitor; the heel of the boat  and the amount of weather helm on the tiller. If  both of these are under control, the boat is sailing  as fast as possible.  
Changing foresails 
Whether swapping a genoa for a jib or vice  versa, the key is preplanning. Changing sails  will require at least 5 minutes of clear water on  the new tack. The single most important  consideration is to reduce the amount of time  with no foresail flying to an absolute minimum.  These are the steps to follow:  
1. On the existing course, lower the foresail just  an inch to relieve pressure on the tack  shackle.  
2. Unroll the new sail on the windward side of  the foredeck.  
3. Disconnect the lazy sheet (the sheet not  under pressure) from the clew of the existing  foresail and connect it to the new foresail.  
4. Hank on the new foresail below the bottom  hank of the existing foresail.  
5. Remove the tack of the existing foresail from  the shackle and insert the tack of the new  foresail. (The existing foresail may ride up a  bit.)  
6. Pull in the lazy sheet so the new headsail is  about ¾ back on the windward side of the  boat. Don’t make it so tight that the sail  can’t be raised easily.  

7. Press the buttons on the auto pilot to initiate  an auto tack. Make sure the auto tack will  take the boat at least 10º beyond the new  close hauled position.  
8. As soon as the auto tack is started, pop the  halyard clutch and move to the foredeck.  The sail will fall to the deck as the boat  swings through the wind. Pull it down  quickly.  
9. Immediately unhank the existing sail,  disconnect the halyard and connect it to the  new sail. Leave the old sail on the (now)  windward side of the deck.  
10. Move back to the cockpit and raise the new  headsail.  
11. Winch in the new headsail and bring the boat  back up to top speed. Have a drink of water  and relax. This is exhausting work.  
12. Only after the boat is sailing at full speed  with the new headsail on the new tack should  the old headsail be retrieved.  
13. Don’t forget to connect the (new) lazy sheet  to the new headsail, or get quite a surprise 10  minutes later during the next tack.  
Using this procedure, the boat should be without  a foresail for less than 45 seconds. In most  races, 45 seconds is an eternity. The  singlehander should practice and time himself. I  do!  
Reefing the mainsail: As with changing fore  sails, the key consideration in reefing is to  shorten the duration of having no main flying as  much as possible.  
I do not use any type of jiffy reefing system on  my 30’ boat. It is simply not necessary and  would slow the reefing process considerably.  The steps I follow in reefing are these:  1. Release the mainsheet completely, allowing  the main to flog.  
2. At the mast, lower the main halyard  sufficiently to connect the reef tack to the  hook and pull the halyard tight again.  
3. Still at the mast, pull the reef line hard to  bring the back of the boom up to the sail at  the reef point.  
4. Back in the cockpit, pull the mainsheet hard  to bring the sail back in.  
(The first four steps of this process should be  complete in less than 30 seconds, thus the  mainsail is not working for only 30 seconds.)  
5. If the reef line does not apply sufficient  tension on the main, the outhaul should be  used to flatten the sail further.  
6. Only after the boat is sailing back up to  speed should the intermediate reef lines be  tied to straighten the sail. These do not give  any strength to the reefed sail, they simply  help to keep the sail in a bundle.  
Jiffy reefing systems: Very few sailors are  satisfied with a single line jiffy reefing system  whereby a single line pulls both the reef tack and  the reef clew down to the boom. It appears that  this is too much work effort for a single line and  is difficult to tighten completely, even with a  winch.  
However, dual line systems have been  successful. With this type of system, a reef line  at the end of the boom runs up through the reef  clew, back down to the end of the boom,  forward along the boom exiting at the  gooseneck, down the to the deck and back to the  cockpit. A second line at the front of the boom  runs up through the reef tack, back down to the  deck and back to the cockpit. A boat with three  reef points will have six lines running back to the  deck, each with its own rope clutch. The main  halyard must also be controlled from this point,  requiring a seventh rope clutch. Because all of  these lines run back to the cockpit, it is likely  that they must be winched tight, rather than  pulled by hand. This is a lot of extra effort and  time. It is faster to perform these jobs at the  mast by hand.  
I find that crewed boats rarely reef and never  practice the reefing process. So a singlehander 

who regularly reefs his mainsail should be able  to do so much faster than a crewed boat.  
Reefing the foresail: As with changing a  foresail, the reefing process is easiest to do while  tacking. The steps are:  
1. Move the lazy sheet up to the reefed clew  position on the sail.  
2. Press the autotack button on the helm.  3. Release the active sheet.  
4. As the boat swings through the tack, drop the  halyard just past the reefed position.  
5. On the new course, walk to the bow and pull  the sail down to the reefed position.  
6. Back in the cockpit, raise the halyard tight.  7. Sheet in the shortened foresail.  
8. Once sailing on course, walk to the foredeck  to move the remaining sheet and bundle the  foot of the foresail with reef lines.  
Tacking 
The easiest way to tack is with a self tacking jib.  However, if the boat is not equipped with this  convenience, it takes quite a bit of practice to  become proficient at tacking a normal jib or  genoa.  
With a crewed boat, tacking through the wind  usually consists of turning past close hauled and  allowing the jib to fly out past the lifelines.  Then winching hard to bring the jib back in as  the boat is steered up to close hauled. This is the  best way to bring the boat back up to speed as  quickly as possible. The exact opposite  approach is taken when singlehanding. This is  because of the difficulty of winching in the sail  with one hand while steering a proper course  with the other.  
I prefer not to use the auto tack setting on the  auto pilot. I find that it performs the maneuver  very slowly and that it does not settle down to  the new close hauled course for an extended  period. I am able to perform the tack much  quicker and more accurately manually.  
Keeping in mind that we are sheeting to the high  side of the boat, the steps to a perfect  singlehanded tack are:  
1. Ensure that the lazy sheet is laying ½ wrap  around the unused winch.  
2. Remove the active sheet from the cleat of the  self tailing winch, but leave two wraps on the  winch.  
3. Start the turn.  
4. Just as the jib is back winded, remove the  wraps from the winch and release the sail.  5. Pause the turn just 20º past head to wind.  Use a knee to control the tiller. This pause  should only last a few seconds and not long  enough to lose speed.  
6. Moving across the cockpit, grab the lazy  sheet and pull fast and hard. The plan is to  ensure the sail is inside the lifelines. That is  the only measurement of success; if the sail  is completely inside the lifelines.  
7. Using the knee, control the tiller to drop the  boat down to close hauled.  
8. Sit down with the tiller in the leeward hand.  9. With the winch handle in the windward hand,  winch the remainder of the sheet. It may be  necessary to steer with the tiller under the  knee and use both arms to drive the winch.  10. Get the boat under control and at best  possible speed on the new tack.  
11. If unsuccessful at keeping the sail inside the  lifelines, there are two possible approaches.  a. If racing, activate the auto pilot and  walk to the fore deck to skirt the sail.  b. If cruising, ease the jib sheet and turn  head to wind. Winch in the sail as it  
flops inside the lifeline, then bear  
away to fill the sail.  
Ken, who has singlehanded a J80 for many  years and has just moved to a much larger  J105 notes that he does not need to use his  
knees to steer through the tack process. He  just releases the helm (a tiller on his J80 and  a wheel on his J105), allowing the normal  weather helm to pull the boat up through the  wind. Only after moving the jib across the 

boat does he need to manually adjust the  helm onto the new course.  
Ken has a small block on the clew of the jib  on his J80. The jib sheet runs from the  forward end of the jib car, through the block  and back down to the jib car then back to the  cockpit. With this 2-to-1 purchase Ken  rarely needs to winch in his jib – pulling is  enough to sheet in all the way.  
The above steps are far easier with a small jib  than with a large genoa. However the steps are  the same for both. With a genoa, the pause at the  top of the turn will be longer as more sail must  be pulled backward.  
Singlehanded tacking requires extensive practice  to master. Each boat will have its own required  timing for each step, changing with each wind  level. Only with hundreds or thousands of  practice tacks will it become second nature.  
The Symmetrical Spinnaker 
There is absolutely no reason why a singlehander  should not use a spinnaker as aggressively as a  fully crewed boat. One of the greatest  compliments I’ve ever received was after a very  high wind race. The skipper of another boat said  “We weren’t going to raise the chute until one of  the crew pointed out that you had.” I’ve been  asked under what conditions I’ll raise a chute,  and the answer I gave was if I’d do it with a  crew, I’ll do it alone.  
I also know that a singlehander can raise or  douse a spinnaker every bit as fast as a fully  crewed boat. A singlehander should raise the  chute just seconds after rounding a windward  mark, and should douse just seconds before the  leeward mark. This is why I advise against  spinnaker socks. They are unnecessary and  cause delays. Likewise raising or dousing into  the forward hatch works with a crewed boat,  because there is someone up there to do it. A  singlehander would have to run to the foredeck,  
douse, then run back to the cockpit to turn the  boat. Any steps that cause a delay should be  eliminated. I have worked out a process that is  failure proof in any conditions, extremely fast  and gives me total control of the sail and the boat  at all times.  
I also recommend that the spinnaker sheets be  tied to the clews using a simple bowline knot.  Quick release shackles are common on large  crewed boats, allowing the guy to be released  from the foredeck, but a singlehander will not be  on the foredeck. Any other type of clip is prone  to releasing on its own. A bowline has never  failed me.  
Using the method described below will not put  undue strain on the auto steering system. It is  more important that the skipper concentrate on  
raising and trimming the chute than worry about  the tiller. However, if he doesn’t follow these  steps the auto steering system will be challenged  beyond its limits. Activate the auto pilot with ¾  of maximum responsiveness.  
1. Packing the chute is vital. This is the leading  cause of later problems. Start at the head and  run the right hand down the green tape on the  starboard side of the sail. It is important to  
use the right hand on the green tape.  
2. Start at the head again and run the left hand  down the red tape on the port side of the sail.  Now the skipper knows that there are no  twists in the sail.  
3. Push the sail into the sail bag with the green  tape on the right and red tape on the left, and  leave the three corners on top of the pile.  
4. The best launching position is from the  lifelines, just at the forward end of the  cockpit. The skipper wants to be able to  work with the sail while standing in the  cockpit. Clip the sail bag to the lifelines,  making sure that the red and green corners  are facing the correct direction, depending on 

whether it is being launched from the port or  starboard side of the boat.  
I keep harping on the red and green sides, and  the left hand or right hand, and the port and  starboard side of the boat because these concepts  are vital to success. If a singlehander follows  these directions consistently, he will never worry  about lines crossing each other as the sail is  raised, creating an hourglass.  
5. Run the spinnaker sheet through the leeward  block to the aft corner of the spinnaker.  Wrap the sheet around the winch, but leave at  least 10’ of slack. DO NOT tighten the  sheet. Some may think that this will give  better control of the chute. In fact, all it does  is drive the boat up as soon as the chute is  raised – a very bad thing. Leave at least 10’  of slack in the sheet.  
6. Run the guy around the bow, through the  pole and to the forward corner of the  
spinnaker. Raise the pole uphaul to the  appropriate height. In moderate or strong  winds, snug the downhaul and pull the pole  about 3’-6’ back from the forestay.  
7. Tie a slip knot about 3’ from the end of the  sheet and guy. This will stop the sheets from  running out when they are released – a  common occurrence.  
8. Clip the halyard to the head of the spinnaker.  
9. Sail down to about 145º off the wind.  Slacken the jib sheet so that the jib is  
properly trimmed for this sailing angle. A  tight jib will cause backwind onto the  spinnaker and lead to a twist. Slacken the  main sheet but do not ease the main onto the  spreaders or shrouds. A halyard will get  caught between the main and the spreaders.  
10. Pull the guy so that the forward corner of the  chute is ¾ of the way to the bow. It may be  necessary to pull the sail out of the bag by  
hand. This is the reason to have the sail bag  next to the cockpit.  
11. Raise the halyard quickly, without letting the  sail drop into the water. At some point it  may be necessary to pull the jib sheet in by  hand to clear the chute out from under the jib  sheet.  
12. Immediately pull the guy to bring the chute  out around the bow. 3’-6’ of the chute will  be showing and it will start to fill. This is  where we will find out if the skipper forgot  to snug the downhaul. Pull the sheet so that  the sail fills completely. At this point the  chute is up and under control, sailing at 145º  off the wind. If this is the intended direction,  ease the downhaul, pull the guy and ease the  sheet until the pole is back to the proper  position.  
13. It is not necessary to rush to drop the jib  down to the deck, but the jib halyard should  be eased by a few feet to allow the top of the  spinnaker to fill. Only when completely  settled should the skipper worry about  dropping the jib altogether.  
14. Grab the jib halyard and release the jib  halyard clutch. Holding onto the jib halyard,  move to the foredeck and pull the jib down to  the deck.  
The entire process of raising the chute should  take less than one minute. There is no reason  that it should be any slower than an average  crewed boat. The only difference being that the  singlehander had to sail deeper than may be  desired to get it done. Back in the cockpit, now  is the time to turn to the desired sailing course  and trim the chute accordingly. The auto pilot  may be overstressed if sailing a high angle into  strong winds. It is better to take the tiller in hand  (or under leg) while trimming the sheet and guy  if heading up. 

Spinnaker trim is both a matter of speed and  safety. An improperly trimmed spinnaker is both  slow and dangerous. Dangerous? Yes, an  improperly trimmed spinnaker will want to drive  the boat either up or down. The process is very  different from a crewed boat.  
The first step is to ease the sheet until the  forward edge of the chute starts to curl, then pull  back on the sheet just a few inches. Leave the  sheet in place. On a crewed boat, one position is  “sheet trimmer” who constantly adjusts the sheet  to keep it slightly tight. The assumption is that  the helmsman is working independently of the  spinnaker to keep the boat on course. The  complete opposite is true for the singlehander.  The auto pilot has limits in steering. If the boat  rounds up by 10º over a normal wave and the  sheet is tightened, this will drive the boat up  further – very quickly. The spinnaker sheet  should be loose enough such that it will curl over  on itself if the boat rounds up, and uncurl as the  boat comes down again. This is an automatic  method for dumping wind. Under good  conditions, even with a high wind, the boat will  sail itself while the skipper enjoys dinner and a  coffee.  
It is often thought that in high winds, it is safer to  hide much of the spinnaker behind the mainsail.  This is a mistake that can lead to serious  broaches. We must always go back to the initial  concept that sail trim is vital. If the spinnaker  pole is well forward, the sail trim assumes that  the boat is on a reach rather than a run, and the  spinnaker will pull the boat up into a broach. An  autopilot or wind vane can not overcome this  pressure. A much safer approach is to switch  down to a smaller spinnaker and pull the pole  back to its proper position, perpendicular to the  wind. In this position the spinnaker is properly  trimmed for the wind direction.  
It is important that the skipper have control over  the sheet, guy and downhaul from the standard  helm position. This will require leading the  sheet across the cockpit to the windward jib  
winch. I usually do this after the chute is up and  the jib is down, when I’m moving onto the  correct course.  
Gybing the Spinnaker:  
Since the first edition of this book, I have done  extensive research and practice on gybing,  arriving at methodology completely new to me.  I originally contacted the Artemis Offshore  Academy (see chapter 3) with the simple  question. “How do you gybe in 30 knots of  wind?” The answer I received was a complete  surprise. I call it the “main-first method.”  
Crewed boats gybe the spinnaker and mainsail  simultaneously. Obviously the singlehander  cannot do so. For the past seven years I have  always moved to the foredeck and gybed the  spinnaker before hurrying back to the cockpit to  gybe the main. It is during this middle period  that the boat is in its most precarious position.  The main-first method was taught to me over the  telephone by Charles Darbyshire and Nigel  King, both of the Artemis Offshore Academy.  
As a first step, the singlehander must learn how  his boat handles without a spinnaker pole. This  is best done in moderate, 10-15 knot winds.  Launch the chute as normal with the pole, and  steer down to 150º apparent. Then move to the  foredeck and disconnect the pole and allow it to  drop away from the guy. The boat should then  be gybed back and forth, numerous times,  without allowing the spinnaker to collapse or  wrap itself around the forestay. If the boat is  sailed too high the spinnaker will fold over on  itself. If the boat is sailed too low, the spinnaker  will wrap. Nigel said that the key is to “learn to  keep the boat underneath the spinnaker.”  
During this pole less practice, the skipper will  learn that the windward sheet should be eased,  such that the clew of the spinnaker is just a few  feet back from the forestay and allowing the boat  to sail higher. Likewise the leeward sheet should  be pulled in, bringing the leeward clew back  about half way. The skipper should practice 

using both tweaker (or twing) lines to control the  chute. What happens if one is pulled tight; if  both are pulled tight? Also during this stage the  skipper will learn that if the boat is sailed at 180  apparent, the spinnaker will wrap around the  forestay – to be avoided.  
Luckily, without the work of gybing the pole, it  is very easy to practice a few dozen gybes simply  by changing direction and swinging the main  back and forth. The key is to learn the  positioning of the spinnaker that will allow it to  fly without wrapping.  
The main-first gybing method is that the  mainsail is gybed before the spinnaker. (See  diagrams on the next page.) With the practice  obtained above, the singlehander will be  confident in his ability to sail the boat without  the traditional pole on the windward side.  Following are the exact steps for moderate  winds;  
1. Clip the safety harness on the current leeward  side of the boat.  
2. Sail fairly deep, down to 160 apparent.  3. Pull both tweaker lines down as far as the  lifelines.  
4. Release the spinnaker pole downhaul.  5. Pull the guy to bring the pole back about 2/3.  6. Ease the sheet so that the clew of the  
spinnaker is about 2 feet from the forestay.  7. Push the buttons on the autopilot to steer  down to 180 and gybe the mainsail by hand.  (With the spinnaker up, the boat should be  sailing sufficiently fast that there is light  pressure on the main.)  
8. Immediately push the autopilot again to steer  the boat up to 160 on the new heading.  When the boat has settled on the new  heading, move further up to 145 apparent.  (My autopilot has a tendency to overshoot,  which is why I use a two-stage process to get  to 145.)  
9. Move to the foredeck on the new windward  side of the boat.  
10. Facing forwards, grab the sheet in the  windward hand.  
11. Use the mast-side hand to remove the pole  from the mast.  
12. Connect the sheet to the pole and disconnect  the old guy from the pole.  
13. Slide the pole up the new guy to the clew.  14. Attach the pole to the mast.  
15. Return to the cockpit, tighten the downhaul  and trim the chute as appropriate.  
It is important to remember that if the boat is  sailed too high without the pole, the spinnaker  will fold over on itself. If the boat is sailed too  low, the spinnaker will wrap. (I speak from  experience on this and Nigel confirmed it.)  
Although there are a large number of instructions  in writing, the entire process should take about  30 seconds. The only way to get good at this is  to practice, practice, practice. A keen  singlehander will sail out and gybe ten times –  just for fun! I have done just that since learning  the new main-first method.  
Gybing in Higher Winds: The excitement of this  maneuver builds as the winds grow. In 20 knots  winds, the tweaker lines must be pulled right  down to the deck before releasing the downhaul.  The pole should be allowed to float, hanging  only from the uphaul.  
Nigel described that in 30 knots winds, he will  steer by hand during the gybe because his  autopilot cannot reliably change course without  rounding up. Only after settling on the new  course will he reactivate the autopilot and move  to the foredeck.  
Dousing the Chute: Dousing rarely leads to  problems if done properly.  
1. Before taking any steps, examine the three  corners of the sails to ensure none of the  lines are caught or tangled to prevent the  douse.  
2. In moderate or heavy winds, sail down to  145º. In light winds it is possible to sail  higher. 

Ease the sheet 2' from the forestay. Step 3: Move to the mast. 
Main-first  
Gybing Method 
d
n
i
W
Step 2: Steer down to 180. Gybe the mainsail by hand. Immediately steer up to 160 on the new heading. 

Grab the sheet in the windward hand and the pole in the leeward hand. Move the pole to the  
windward side up at the clew.. 
d 
n
i
Step 4: Trim the sail as appropriate for  
the new heading. 

W
Thoughts, Tips, Techniques and Tactics for Singlehanded Sailing  

3. Raise the jib, leaving the jib sheet moderately  slack.  
4. Make sure that the guy and halyard are free  to run – they will run very quickly. Tie a  slipknot at the end of the guy.  
5. Stand at the front of the cockpit facing  forward.  
6. Uncleat the guy, but leave it wrapped on the  winch.  
7. Reach under the boom and over the lifelines  and grab the tight sheet in the leeward hand.  8. Flip the guy off of the winch and let go. It  will run out extremely fast.  
9. Pull in on the sheet, beneath the boom. Grab  as much of the foot of the spinnaker as  possible in just a few seconds. It is not  necessary to grab the entire foot. Even just  the corner will do in high winds.  
10. Release the halyard clutch and let the halyard  fly.  
11. In a hand-over-hand motion, immediately  pull the entire sail into the cockpit or dump it  down the hatch. If pulled quickly enough the  sail will not get wet. It is best not to pull  frantically, just quickly and steadily. There  is time.  
12. Turn to the desired course and trim the jib.  13. Only after attaining speed on the new course  should the pole be stored.  
Very high winds: At some point, it becomes  uncomfortable for a singlehander to gybe the  chute. The wind level and sea state where this  happens will increase as experience is gained.  However the wind level at which a spinnaker is  flown will also increase with experience. When  this level has been exceeded, the best approach is  to douse the spinnaker, tie the sheets and halyard  together and pull them around the boat, reattach  them to the spinnaker (or preferably to another  spinnaker that is properly packed), and raise the  spinnaker on the other side.  
When things go bad.  
The challenge of flying a spinnaker is that things  can and will go bad very quickly. Fortunately  
there is a remedy  for every situation  and nothing has  proven to be fatal to  this skipper or boat.  One overriding  
technique is DO  NOT RELEASE  THE GUY until you  want to bring the  
spinnaker down.  Releasing the guy  will almost always  cause greater  
problems. Think of  the spinnaker  
exactly the same as  any other sail. If a  gust of wind hits the  main, the first  
reaction is the  
release the sheet.  Likewise, if a gust  hits the spinnaker,  release the sheet.  Think of the guy as  a permanent  
attachment, just like  the tack on the main  or jib.  
Problem: Spinnaker  goes up with an  hour glass: The  only real remedy is  to lower the halyard  by 4’. Often this  will solve the  
problem as the  
halyard itself  
caused the twist and  will allow it to  
untwist.  
The only other  
possible solution is 
An hour glass and  
the sheet is really  
tight  
Great series of photos by Andrew Madding  
Easing the halyard released the hour  glass but the sheet is still tight 
With the sheet so tight the  
boat wants to round up  
Releasing the sheet was the only  way to regain control  

to pull down on the middle of the foot of the  chute. If this does not solve the problem,  nothing else will work. Pulling on the sheet or  guy, or pulling on the corners will not do it. It is  a waste of time to keep trying. The faster  solution is to drop the spinnaker into the cockpit,  undue the hourglass even if this requires  disconnecting the sheets, and raise it again from  the cockpit. If the spinnaker was properly  packed and raised as described earlier, it will not  go up with an hourglass. Two minutes of  preparation during the beat to windward is worth  ten minutes of struggle while watching the fleet  sail away.  
Problem: Boat rounds up immediately on raising  the chute: This is caused by having the sheet too  tight. The solution is to immediately release the  sheet by 10’-20’. Do not release the guy in this  
situation. With the knowledge given on  launching the chute, this problem should not  happen. But skippers continue to believe that  they have more control over the spinnaker if the  sheet is tight. Like a teenaged child, it is  impossible to gain control by holding too tight.  Only by letting go can you hope to have some  influence over its behavior.  
Problem: Gust of wind causes the boat to heel:  Once again, simply release the sheet by 10’.  There is no problem with having the spinnaker  flapping in the wind for a few seconds.  
Problem: Spinnaker wraps around the forestay  and jib halyard: This is a major problem that is  often not solvable quickly. Do not release the  sheet or guy. Sail downwind at about 145º.  Release the spinnaker halyard and move to the  bow to pull the chute and sheets down to the  deck. It may be possible and necessary to  unwrap it once or twice by hand, sufficiently to  pull it down. However do not attempt to unwrap  it completely while it is still up and you are at  the bow. It is unwise to have the spinnaker  suddenly fill when standing at the bow, a long  way from the boat controls. Climbing back to  
the cockpit when the boat is heeled at 65º is  more fun than most skippers want.  
Problem: On dousing, the spinnaker comes in  behind the mainsail and above the boom. This  will occur if attempting to douse the chute in  higher winds at a high angle. When the guy is  released, the spinnaker drives back behind the  mainsail. No one is strong enough to hold the  sheet in front of the boom. It will not be possible  to clear the mess before dousing. Simply  continue to douse from behind the main.  Afterwards, disconnect all the lines. This  problem would have been averted by sailing  down to 145º before dousing, but sometimes this  is not possible.  
Problem: In high winds the spinnaker simply  gets away. Sometimes the pressure on the guy is  so strong that it runs out from the skipper’s  hands, often causing a rope burn. This is why it  is very important to have slip knots at the end of  the sheet and guy. Let the guy run out all the  way to the slipknot. Grab the sheet and release  the halyard to douse the chute as much as  normal. (Note that a knife should be mounted in  the cockpit to cut the sheet, as a last resort.)  
Problem, No slipknot on the sheet and the  spinnaker is attached only at the top of the mast  by the halyard, with the sheet and guy flapping  wildly one hundred feet away from the side of  the boat. Do not release the halyard until the  situation is under control. If the halyard is  released, the chute will fall in the water well  behind the boat. This is a major cause of mast  breakage. Even if the mast does not break it  will take ten minutes to drag the spinnaker back  on board – I’ve done it. The only possible  strategy is to sail down in an attempt to cover the  chute behind the main. Use any means possible  (such as a boat hook) to snag one of the flapping  sheets and pull it into the cockpit. Release the  halyard and douse the chute.  
All of the above problems become especially  interesting if sailing directly towards a rocky 

shoreline with just two minutes until impact.  The key to singlehanding is the ability to very  thoughtfully, but very quickly, consider all of the  options and arrive at the best possible solution.  But this is why we took up singlehanding in the  first place. We have more fun and face more  challenges flying a spinnaker than any other  aspect of singlehanding. The only important  thing is to laugh at all of the problems and at  ourselves. It we can’t do this, we should take up  basket weaving. As mentioned elsewhere, I  know – absolutely, that something will go wrong  every time I go sailing. But I have never once  had a bad day sailing.  
Tweakers – Use them properly  
Tweaker lines are invaluable for spinnaker  control. In high winds, the spinnaker pole  should be tightened down hard to flatten the luff  and the sheet side tweaker must be kept lose.  This allows the spinnaker leach to twist off,  dumping excess wind. The skippers should think  of the spinnaker just like the jib or main. In high  winds let the sail twist. If the sheet tweaker is  tight, the boat will start rocking and rolling – a  very bad situation.  
Gybing without the Pole  
Once the skipper has learned to gybe using the  main-first method, it becomes obvious that  gybing the pole is not necessary at all for short  term situations. I use this technique often when I  need to get around a mark or around a small  island. Simply ease the sheet until the clew is 2- 3 feet from the forestay. Then harden down on  the sheet side tweaker line. Swing the boat and  gybe the main and continue to sail in the new  direction. It does take a little more attention so  that the chute does not collapse on itself, but I  have sailed for as long as 15 minutes with the  wind up to 135 apparent. There is no loss of  speed and it is much easier than gybing the chute  twice in short order to round a mark.  
Asymmetrical spinnaker  
Ken has singlehanded a J80 for many years and  has recently bought a J105. He has perfected  
raising an asymmetrical spinnaker after being  taught by past J80 World Champion Kerry  Klingler. The key is to NOT pull the tack  forward until the halyard is completely raised.  There are two reasons for this. First the tack is  very likely to catch on fittings as it is pulled  forward. Second, we don’t want the sail to fill  until the halyard is raised completely and the  boat is under control. The steps are:  
1. Extend the pole.  
2. Ensure that the sheet is sufficiently loose that  the spinnaker will not fill – even when the  tack is pulled forward.  
3. Raise the halyard completely. The chute will  be in a long column shielded by the main.  4. Pull the tack line to bring the tack completely  forward.  
5. Trim the sheet to fill the sail.  
Dousing an Asymmetrical:  
1. Release the tack.  
2. Gather the entire foot of the chute.  3. Release the halyard and pull the chute into  the bag in the companionway.  
Ken commented that by gathering the entire foot  of the sail, everything was kept in good order  and did not require sorting for the next launch.  
Ken’s J80 came with a spinnaker sock but it was  difficult to use. The sock was hauled down from  the mast, while the main resistance was well  forward from the end of the pole. The difference  in angle made it difficult to pull down. On his  new J105, the sock pulls down to the end of the  pole, so the effort is directly in line with the sail,  making it much easier to douse.  
Extreme winds:  
At some point, the winds become too high to fly  a spinnaker at all and just a mainsail and jib are  in use. In such winds, gybing is a special  challenge. If the main is not sheeted in the  swinging main will break the boom or the  gooseneck. If the main is sheeted but the gybe is  not completed immediately, the wind will catch  the main and drive the boat upwards into the  path of an oncoming freighter at midnight. (Yes, 

this has happened to me.) In very high winds the  singlehander has a time frame of just seconds to  pull in the main, complete the gybe and release  the main.  
The solution is to completely ignore the jib and  concentrate solely on the main. When heading  downwind, the jib will not cause any problems if  it is back winded. The steps to an extreme wind  gybe are:  
1. The overriding priority is to complete these  steps within a matter of seconds. Any delay  will have dire consequences.  
2. Head down as far as possible.  
3. Sheet in the main as far as possible. It must  be within 20º of centre.  
4. Immediately gybe to 170º on the new course.  5. Immediately release the main sheet and let it  ease as slow as is controllable by hand. Do  not let it slam back against the spreaders.  6. Wrap of the jib sheet around the lazy winch.  7. Release the jib sheet of the back winded jib  and pull on the newly active jib sheet. The  jib will fall easily fall into place in front of  the mainsail.  
8. Steer to the proper course and trim the sails.  
Heaving-too 
Heaving-too is a vital skill for the singlehander,  but shockingly is little known and little used. I  had a discussion with the singlehanded skipper  
of an Open 40 who had faced an extremely  dangerous storm and a lee shore. I asked if he  had considered heaving-too and allowing the  storm to pass. He replied that he had never  practiced heaving-too and did not know if it  could be done with his boat. I was fairly amazed  with his response that he did not know how to  perform the most basic and possibly the most  crucial of sailing skills.  
On the other hand, my friend Jeanne Socrates has  sailed around the world twice. She makes it a  practice to heave-too whenever the winds reach  storm conditions. She finds this a very  comfortable way to wait for better weather.  
There are many instances where heaving-too is  vital:  
∙ When nearing the dock without an auto pilot,  heaving-too allows the skipper to calmly and  safely drop the sails, mount fenders, start the  motor, etc. (It is especially impressive to  
stop the boat just 20 yards from the harbour,  calmly ready the boat to dock and then motor  in.) I used this method every single time I  returned to dock for the two years that I  singlehanded before having an auto pilot.  
∙ In cases when the motor fails at a crucial  moment, heaving-too gives the singlehander  all the time necessary to check the gas tank,  check the fuel lines or even remove and  check the spark plugs. I have done all of  these just outside the harbour entrance.  
∙ Heaving-too is an excellent way to drop the  jib and have it fall on the deck rather than in  the water even if the singlehander has an auto  pilot. This is because the jib is sitting, back  winded, directly above the foredeck.  
∙ Heaving-too is just a great way to take a nice  break on a very windy day, especially for the  rookie singlehander. After a long period of  exertion, it can be used just to take the time  to sip a coffee or have a sandwich. In open  waters, it can even be used to safely have a  sleep.  
∙ Heaving-too works better in high wind  conditions. It does not work if there is no  wind, but the boat can just drift.  
Each type of boat will behave differently when  heaving too. For example some boats will  require a slight pressure on the main sail, while  others will heave too with the main completely  lose or dropped. And each boat will behave  differently with different sail combinations. For  example my boat will hold its position better  with the genoa than with the jib.  
Heaving-too is very simple. On a typical  modern sloop it can be done with just a short line  or using the auto pilot. In a hove-too position,  the fore sail is tight but back winded, the 

Heaving Too from a Beat 

ind angleTack through the wind but do not release the jib sheet. 
After the tack, release the main sheet completely and tie  
tiller to the leeward side of the boat. 
Back 
winded 
jib
Loose 
main 

Sheet the jib in tight, behind the main.
Heaving Too from a Run 
Steer deep down wind. Sheet in the jib tight, shielded by the main. Gybe through the wind but do not release the jib sheet. After the gybe, release  the main sheet completely and tie the tiller to the leeward side of the boat. 
d 
n
i
W
Back 
winded 
jib 
Loose 
main 

Thoughts, Tips, Techniques and Tactics for Singlehanded Sailing  

mainsail is loose to flogging, and the tiller is tied  to the leeward rail.  
Here are the steps to heave-too from a beat or  close reach:  
1. Sail as normal on a tight beat with the jib and  main sheeted in completely. The boat should  be pointed in the heading directly opposite to  the heading desired in the hove-too position.  
I.e. if the skipper wants to be pointing due  West, he should be sailing due East.  
2. Tack the boat through the wind, but DO  NOT release the jib sheet. This will back  wind the jib against the mast and shrouds.  
3. Immediately after the boat has past head to  wind, release the main sheet completely. The  mainsail will fall against the newly leeward  shroud. Even in high winds the main will  only flog gently. The boat will fall off the  wind past the close hauled heading.  
4. Push the tiller to the newly leeward rail and  tie it in place.  
5. The boat will settle in a heading directly  opposite the original heading, on a beam  reach.  
6. If desired, for an extended stay the mainsail  can be dropped to the deck.  
Here are the steps to heave-too from a broad  reach or run:  
1. Drop the spinnaker and raise the jib or  Genoa.  
2. Sail down to 160º off the wind so the jib is  shielded by the main.  
3. Sheet in on the jib until it is tight.  4. Gybe the boat but do not release the jib sheet.  5. Remember when gybing to sheet the main all  
the way in, turn the boat and then release the  main sheet on the leeward side.  
6. Allow the boat to head up to a beam reach  with the back winded jib on the windward  side.  
7. Push the tiller to the leeward rail and tie it in  place.  
The action of the boat is that the back winded jib  is trying to push the boat down while the rudder  is trying to push the boat up. They will  
counteract each other perfectly. The boat will  continue to move at a very slow speed, perhaps  ½ knot. Different fore sails will have a different  result. For example, my boat is nearly dead in  the water when hove-too with my 155% genoa.  But my boat moves at ½ knot when hove-too  with my 100% jib.  
Note that the mainsail and tiller can be used to  adjust the boat heading when hove-too. Pulling  in the main sheet to give wind pressure on the  mainsail will aim the boat more upwind to a  close reach, suitable in large waves. Moving the  tiller towards the centre will drop the boat to a  broader reach. The skipper should choose the  most comfortable boat direction and make  adjustments accordingly.  
The singlehander should practice heaving-too to  determine how the boat will react with each fore  sail. Stopping the boat may require easing the  jib sheet or changing the tiller position slightly.  
Follow the steps below to start sailing again:  1. Untie the tiller and take it in hand or activate  the auto pilot.  
2. Release the tight jib sheet.  
3. Trim the newly active jib sheet.  
4. Trim the main sheet.  
The boat will start sailing again on a beam reach  with perfect control.  
If dropping sails to enter a harbour, follow these  steps. They can be done calmly and slowly  regardless of the wind conditions:  
1. Heave too.  
2. Drop the mainsail and secure it to the deck or  boom.  
3. Tie the fenders to the boat rails.  
4. Start the motor, but keep it out of gear.  5. Release the jib halyard. The jib will fall  neatly on the fore deck. It may require some  pulling to get the jib completely down.  6. Release the tiller.  
7. Put the motor in gear and enter the harbour  with a smile. 

Chapter 8: Racing – get into it 
Racing is the best way to learn to sail a boat  well. It has been said that one year of racing is  worth ten years of cruising. I believe that the  difference is even greater. The reason is that in  racing, the boats are forced to take a route that is  often uncomfortable and in worse weather than  they would cruise. As well, in racing each  skipper will be comparing himself to all of the  other boats – it’s just human nature to want to do  well. Sailing poorly is the equivalent to driving  a car with the emergency brake on. It is just  inefficient. Sailing well is like driving a tuned  car. Racing is the best way to learn to sail well.  
Most regions have a limited number of  singlehanded races, so there is no choice but to  race singlehanded against fully crewed boats. I  race every week – year round. All but one or  two of these races are against crewed boats.  Over the last four years I’ve raced at least 200  times against fully crewed boats. I win few of  these races, but I gain valuable experience every  time.  
For all of the reasons listed above and for the  various issues listed below, a singlehanded boat  will not be as fast as a crewed boat. The only  way to overcome this is for the singlehander to  sail more intelligently than any other boat on the  race course. The tips given below will assist in  this endeavor.  
Handicap adjustment for singlehanding  against crewed boats 
After racing for a full season, I found that I was  very consistently racing bow on bow with  another club boat that was rated at 13 seconds  slower than me. At the annual club race  meeting, I asked for, and was given a 13 second  per mile PHRF handicap adjustment for  singlehanding. Over the three years since that  time I’ve found this to be quite fair. On  corrected time I tend to do well on light wind  days, horribly on strong wind days, and finish in  the middle of the pack on moderate wind days.  
This is as fair as it can be. The tactics discussed  below will provide an explanation of why a  handicap adjustment is appropriate for the  singlehander – it is either impossible or unsafe to  sail as fast as a well trained crewed boat – but  only 13 seconds per mile worth! Any more and  the skipper is just not sailing well.  
“Distance races” are ideal for the singlehander.  These distance races might be just 5-7 miles long  on weeknights or 15-25 miles long on weekends.  A typical course will be around a nearby island  or navigation buoys with only one or two  spinnaker runs. It may be necessary to request  that weekly distance races are undertaken. It is  common knowledge that fewer boats are racing  round-the-buoys races. Distance races are a  great opportunity to refresh the racing scene for  all boats, not just singlehanders. Most club  distance races are a more casual affair than  round-the-buoys races, with less aggression by  all. It is time to get off the merry-go-round.  
Normal round-the-buoys racing is an extra  challenge for the singlehander because of the  need to keep clear of other boats at the rounding  marks. This will probably mean sailing 50 yards  away from the windward mark before raising the  spinnaker, and dropping the spinnaker 50 yards  before the leeward mark. Obviously this is a  huge racing disadvantage. But as a singlehander,  there is an extra responsibility to keep clear of  other racing boats. There are times to be  aggressive and times to give way, even if it is not  required by the rules. The best advice is to  remember that a singlehander is probably not  going to win the race anyway, so if a skipper is  generous with the rules, others are much more  likely to be generous the next time. For  example, I would never head a boat up into the  committee boat at a starting line, because I know  that next week the position will be reversed and  I’ll hope for the same consideration.  
It is important to let other racers know that the  boat is singlehanding. While it is unreasonable  to expect any extra consideration (they will often 

give it anyway) it becomes a factor during tricky  maneuvers. For example, in high winds I will  often hail a nearby boat to “keep an eye out”  while I am raising a spinnaker just in case my  boat rounds up sharply.  
I’ve never hit another boat while racing  singlehanded, but I’ve done so twice with a  crew. I believe that a singlehander is much more  aware of his surroundings than a crewed boat  because he will never assume that someone else  is watching – there is no one else! It would be  ridiculous to drive a car while asking the  passengers to look for children crossing the road.  In the same vein the singlehander is responsible  for driving the boat and looking for hazards on  the water. In retrospect it actually seems safer  this way.  
Flying the Number 1 pennant, (a red dot on a  white background) is the best way to remind  other boats that you are singlehanding. When  asked, I remind people that the number 1 pennant  is the universally unknown symbol of the  singlehanded sailor.  
The starting line 
Against crewed boats: The starting line is the  one place where a singlehander can gain a  significant advantage. The overriding  philosophy at the line is “not to be in first place  across the line – but to be in first place one  minute later.” This philosophy will keep the  singlehander out of trouble, out of other boat’s  way and will give him a great start a majority of  the time. This philosophy has worked so well  for me that I’ve been complimented on having  many good starts.  
The singlehander should arrive at the start line at  least five minutes before the first warning gun.  Take a good look at the line and figure out where  all the other boats are going to be at the start.  Most often in club races all of the boats will be  crowding the committee boat end or the pin end,  depending on the wind. So the first tactic will be  
to avoid that end of the line completely. Why?  There three key reasons: first because there will  be lots of jostling and calls to “head up” in the  crowd. A singlehander has enough on his mind  and does not want to get involved in this type of  jockeying for the one top position. Second,  because only one boat is going to be first across  the line and in club racing this is as much a  matter of luck as skill. All of the other boats will  be sucking bad wind behind the first boat. Third,  we know that in high winds, the singlehanded  boat will have significantly more leeway than  crewed racers. So the singlehander does not  want to be sailing just slightly to windward of  any other boats. He will drift down onto them,  and need to drop behind to avoid a collision.  
So a singlehander who avoids the crowd has,  with this one tactic, put himself into clear air and  probably into second place 100 yards after the  start. I can’t say how many times I’ve used this  tactic with success. I’m all alone, in clear air and  sailing a full speed at the gun on the so called  “unfavoured end” of the line while I watch 10  boats shouting at each other and sucking bad  wind at the favoured end of the line.  
It is truly amazing to watch this phenomenon on  downwind race starts where the boat that was  first across the line in the crowd has his wind  killed by the spinnakers of all the other boats  behind him. Only on rare occasions should a  singlehander get mixed in with the crowd at the  start.  
Another tactic that I’ve use well is to follow the  others at the committee boat end, but just slightly  behind, and then tack immediately after the start.  All of the other boats on the line can’t tack onto  port until the lead boat tacks, and he might not  want to. Once again, I’m in clear air at full  speed just moments after the start. It is difficult  to foresee every starting tactic but it remains the  best advice to stay away from the pack.  
Another example is in upwind starts of  handicapped races, where the biggest boat takes 

a position anywhere near the pack and soon  moves into the lead. All of the other boats are  stuck in his bad air. It is smarter to be well away  from the pack in these situations. Remember,  the singlehander does not want to be in first  place across the line, he wants to be in first place  one minute later.  
So, before the warning gun the singlehander has  figured out where the crowd will be and where  he will be. Now is the opportunity to determine  how to get there. As a first step, he should pick a  route to take on the final run to the line. The  goal is to hit the line at the gun and at full speed.  Perhaps the best choice is to run all the way  down the line from the committee boat to the  pin. Or perhaps the better choice is to run from  100 yards behind the line, up at a 45º angle.  There have even been times when I’ve used a  port start at the pin end because I knew all the  others would be on starboard on the boat end.  
It may be possible to find a crab pot, a small  buoy or a house on shore to use as a starting  point for the final run. As a general thought the  starting point for the final run should be slightly  less than 1 minute from the start.  
Next, figure out how to get to that starting point.  In most cases the singlehander will sail up to the  starting point at a moderate speed. For example,  if the final run will be from the committee boat  
down the line to the pin, the starting point will be  the committee boat. How to get to the  committee boat will probably be on a direct line  extension of the starting line. If the starting  point is 100 yards back of the line, the skipper  might choose to get to the starting point by  sailing from the line downwards. I’ll call this the  warm up.  
Next, use a stopwatch to time exactly how long it  will take to get to the chosen starting point  including both the warm up and the final run to  the line. It is important to be as precise as  possible in this timing and include the time it  
takes to make the turn from the warm up to the  final run.  
For example, I’ve chosen to start at the pin end.  I know that the other racers will start at the  committee boat end and they will probably come  up from 45º below the line, so before the gun the  line will be completely clear and I can run down  the line easily. My warm up will be to sail away  from the committee boat for one minute, then  gybe and sail back passing just below the  committee boat and then run the line to the pin  end. To prepare for this, I time the entire  sequence before the first warning gun. I click  my stopwatch as I pass the committee boat, sail  for exactly 1 minute and gybe and then sail back  toward the committee boat and down the line. I  stop the stopwatch just as I head up at the pin. In  a typical club race I’ve found that I sail out for 1  minute, back for 1 minute and 15 seconds, and  then 45 seconds down the line to the pin. I’ve  done these measurements so many times that I  really don’t need to do them before every race if  I arrive late.  
If done reasonably well, this timing sequence  will put the singlehander exactly on the line at  the gun. The amazing part is that most other  racers will not be doing this type of timing; they  will simply be guessing on their final run to the  line and more often than not will be wrong. By  taking this simple extra step of timing the  starting sequence, the singlehander will have a  very significant advantage over the other boats.  A singlehander must use his mind to make up for  the many speed disadvantages faced in racing.  
Against singlehanded boats: The opposite  approach is used at the start. Very few sailors do  more than one singlehanded race each year.  Because of this they tend to be rather shy in the  normal congestion at the starting line. In a  crewed race these same skippers would be  pushing their way to the best possible starting  position, but in a singlehanded race they float  around nearly aimlessly. 

An experienced singlehanded skipper who is  confident in his abilities can take advantage of  their timidity. He should use the same level of  aggression at the start as he would in any crewed  race, by moving to the best possible position at  the favored end of the line. The skipper who  uses this tactic will be well ahead of every other  boat in the fleet.  
I have used this approach in every singlehanded  race I have ever entered, and it has never proven  wrong. Perhaps this will not be the case if I am  
able to enter the Figaro solo series, but it is  certainly the situation with normal club racing.  
Rounding the windward mark 
For the singlehander, rounding the windward  mark requires extra attention because this is a  key point where boats congregate. Unfortunately  there is little that can be done to improve the  situation without causing great distress to other  crewed boats, which will not pay off in the long  run. The overriding goal at a mark is seeking  out clear water where the autopilot can be  engaged and the spinnaker raised. Nothing is  more frustrating than being pinned into a  crowded position watching other boats raise their  spinnakers.  
Most crewed boats will enter the mark zone  wide, with the plan to turn tight around the mark.  For the singlehander, the best strategy is to enter  the mark zone tight with the idea of sailing wide  after the mark. Although it may be legally  permissible to force other boats wide as well,  this will defeat the purpose of the maneuver  because the singlehander won’t get the clear  water that he wants. The idea of this tactic is to  create clear water to activate the autopilot and  raise the spinnaker without danger of collision  with other boats. Often the best strategy is to  duck behind other boats allowing them to lead  around the mark but gaining clear water instead.  Similar to the starting line strategy, the  singlehander will forgo fighting for the best  
possible position at the mark in favour of gaining  a good position one minute later.  
If the boat is properly set up, and if the skipper is  prepared, it should not take any longer for the  singlehander to raise a chute than a crewed boat.  But this requires that he have the clear space  necessary to do it. So, even if he is first to the  mark, the singlehander should sail wide because  following boats will quickly envelop him.  
The amount of clear water required to raise the  spinnaker depends entirely on the wind  conditions. In light winds there is very little risk  of a massive roundup when raising the chute, so  only a small amount of clear water is needed.  
In moderate winds, the danger of a round up  increases significantly with the inexperience of  the singlehander. I will repeat the instructions I  gave earlier to make sure that the spinnaker sheet  has significant slack to that the chute does not  fill when first raised. The chute should only fill  when the skipper consciously trims the sheet  with the intention of having the spinnaker fill.  Obviously this will only be done when the  skipper is confident that it is safe to do so.  
In heavy winds the risk of an accident with the  spinnaker is significant. The singlehander must  seek out a considerable amount of clear water, as  much as 50 yards, before raising the chute. The  singlehander should sail wide around the  windward mark to get this needed space. Other  racers will almost certainly be sailing tight  around the windward mark, attempting to get the  best line to the next mark.  
It is a tactical risk for the singlehander to mount  the spinnaker pole before rounding the windward  mark. In attempting to sail as close to the mark  as possible, the skipper may misjudge and  undercut, or a crowd at the mark may force the  singlehander below the mark. In either case, the  singlehander is forced into rapid turns to get  back on course and back around the mark. These 

turns are impossible with the spinnaker pole in  place.  
It is also wise for the singlehander to consider  gybing with jib and main only, before mounting  the spinnaker pole and raising the chute. This is  appropriate in heavy winds where the single hander might not want to gybe once the  spinnaker is up. Sacrificing one minute after  rounding the mark is preferable to sailing a  longer stretch without the spinnaker later in the  leg.  
Leeward mark  
A singlehander need not give any water at the  leeward mark. He should be able to douse the  spinnaker and round the mark every bit as fast as  a crewed boat. There are a couple of conditions.  First, he must ensure that the spinnaker halyard  and guy are ready to run without any snags. If  they do not run freely, he will not get the chute  down by the mark.  
A singlehander will not be able to do a windward  takedown common to crewed boats because he  can not get the pole down before the mark. He  must douse the chute beneath the boom into the  main hatch, and leave the pole up, thus staying  on the same tack, until after he has cleared the  mark and stabilized his position on the upwind  leg. Only once he is at full speed on the  windward leg should he drop the pole. Naturally  he will not be able to tack until the pole is down.  
Some singlehanders launch and douse from the  foredeck. This is much slower than from the  cockpit because it must be done far ahead of the  mark, leaving the boat with only a small headsail  in the final boat lengths before the mark. I  usually leave my chute up until the very last  moment on a downwind leg. This is not possible  if dousing to the foredeck because the skipper  must give himself time to return to the cockpit.  
When boats meet: Of course the singlehander  must adhere to the same port/starboard or  windward/leeward rules when boats are crossing.  
Because the skipper is alone, fully crewed boat  will often assume that they have not been seen  and shout “STARBOARD” more than they  would for other crewed boats. The singlehander  should acknowledge that they have been seen by  shouting “I’VE GOT YOU” or “NO  
PROBLEM” in return, or else the crewed boat  will just keep shouting. I’ve found that just a  hand wave is not enough to acknowledge a  shout.  
Space Filler: Moby Dick  
Sometimes in life, a coincidence is so profound  as to provide positive proof of the hand of some  superior sentience. Such an event occurred as I  enjoyed the light winds and sunshine of Cadboro  
Bay. It was a wonderful day when I set out  singlehanded, as is my want, for an afternoon  cruise. My Olson 30, Foolish Muse, is a racing  boat but on that day I was prepared for a stress  free bask with coffee in one hand, a salami  sandwich in the other and the tiller beneath my  knee.  
On such days I will normally be found with an  MP3 player hanging from my neck. I have  grown to love classic audio books, those books  that are far too long and much too boring to  actually read, but quite entertaining when  presented by a pleasant voice with a British  accent. Seafaring titles such as Carroll’s “The  Hunting of the Snark,” London’s “The Sea  Wolf,” and Barrow’s “Eventful History of the  Mutiny and Piratical Seizure of H.M.S. Bounty,”  are among my favorites. On this day I was  determined to finish the final chapters of  Melville’s “Moby Dick, or the Whale.”  Melville’s tome, all 135 chapters, took nearly 22  hours over numerous trips to complete. But a  slow beat was the perfect setting to complete this  task.  
Chapters 133 and 134 of the book provided a  nail-bighting build-up towards the climax. They  gave the details of days one and two of the final  chase of the white leviathan during which 


The event which shapes this story occurred  exactly half way through the climatic chapter  135. As we are all familiar, the great white  whale was exacting his final and deadly revenge  on the Pequod and its crew. On my little craft I  heard a familiar Pffffffft, normally associated  with a seal surfacing for a leisurely breath of  fresh air. But today the sound was louder than I  had become accustomed - so loud as to penetrate  my ear buds. Thirty seconds later the Pffffffft  returned. This caught my attention. And in  another thirty seconds my own whale, gray – not  white, surfaced only 40 feet from my starboard  bow. At the very moment of my gray whale  sighting, the white whale of my hearing was  breaking the back of the Pequod.  
One of two Blue Whales, traveling together, that   I saw while singlehanding about 50 miles off the coast of Vancouver Island.
What an unbelievable way to complete this book.  While my whale was benignly enjoying the same  sunshine as I, the final lines of the book wound  down with Ismael clinging to a makeshift  casket/lifebuoy.  
I have sailed some 3,000 hours over the past 8  years. While each and every one of those hours  has been incredibly enjoyable, a few, just a very very few, have proven to be life changing. The  short interval from 1:30 to 2:30 on that afternoon  is a time period that I will remember until the  day that I follow the Pequod into the beyond.  

for the Duration of a Long Distance Singlehanded Race  (This chapter was written on the bases of a separate psychological study performed in 2012)  
One hundred years ago the marathon was considered a survival race. Early Olympic film shows wobbly  legged men collapsing at the finish line in a state of advanced delirium. Just finishing was considered  remarkable. A century later and hundreds of thousands of average people run marathons all over the  world with dozens of high-level, potential winners in every race. The most popular books on running  concentrate on how to win rather than merely finish.i  
Long distance, singlehanded sailboat racing appears to be stuck in the mindset of the early marathon  runners; that finishing is enough to be remarkable. Until now, all academic studies on the subject have  concentrated solely on coping with the numerous stresses of the sport, such as lack of sleep,  hallucinations, solitude, etc.ii Even the most popular books on the great singlehanded races have barely  touched the concept of winning, keeping their attention on the survival aspects of the voyage.iii One of  the most often repeated statements in singlehanded racing is “In order to win, you first have to finish.”iv  While this is obviously true, it reveals the mindset of the sport, even at the highest level.  
The time has come to move beyond the notion of simply finishing the race. Competitive singlehanded  sailors need to understand and master the concepts that will take them from the finish line to the top of the  podium. There are many schools where one can learn to sail a boat fast, even while singlehandedv, but it  is apparent that no one has studied the mental/psychological requirements necessary to win a  Transatlantic or Transpacific race. This paper attempts to fill the void and move racing to the next level  of competition.  
There are no sports realistically comparable to long distance, singlehanded racing. A typical event will  last two weeks, non-stop 24-hours a day, in complete isolation other than intermittent radio chat. The  skippers eat, sleep, perform bodily functions, read, chat on the radio, and yes – even sail their boat, all  while racing. The closest comparable is the Iditarodvi dog sled race in Alaska: A single person in  isolation (although they meet up at each leg-end); a very difficult and unpredictable environment; the  dogs are doing the physical work with the musher driving. The results of a personality study on the  Iditarod mushers are presented later in this paper.  
Much of this work is based on a psychological study completed by seven of twenty-three racers in the  2012 Singlehanded Transpacvii; a biannual race from San Francisco to Kauai, Hawaii. This is considered  the preeminent singlehanded race in North America. The study participants completed pre-race, post-race  and twice daily questionnaires on “maintaining an aggressive/winning attitude for the duration of a long  distance singlehanded race.” (See Appendix 1).  
It is important to note that the twice-daily reports were completed before their radio check-in. That is, the  racers’ feelings in the reports were based only on the perception of their own performance in isolation, not  as compared to other racers reported positions. 

Also this work is based on the knowledge of the author, with approximately 900 afternoon singlehanded  sails including 250 races and the 2006 Singlehanded Transpac.viii During the 2006 race, the author placed  2nd overall, missing 1st place by less than 2½ hours or 0.1 knots of average boat speed. I am in full  knowledge that the reasons for this 0.1 knot failure was not lack of sailing skill but was completely  because of the psychological factors that accepted my sailing at significantly less than full potential speed.  This study was initiated in an attempt to understand and correct this 0.1 knot speed differential.  
The most important point: 
The line “In order to win, you first have to finish,” is the most dangerous statement in this sport. I have  never heard a team entering the Super Bowl say, “In order to win we will block a little softer so we don’t  get injured.” I have never heard a runner entering the Olympic 100 metre dash say that she was going to  slow down so she won’t pull a muscle. I never heard Mohammed Ali say that he was going to take it easy  so that he could last the entire 12 rounds. Every top athlete in every sport knows that the only way to win  is to leave everything they have, and more, out on the field of play. The line should read:  “In order to win, you have to sail harder than every other boat on the water.”  
The study proves this to be true. Question 8 of the twice daily survey was: Compared to normal  afternoon races or cruises near your home club, have you sailed: (1) very conservatively, (2)  conservatively, (3) the same, (4) aggressively, (5) very aggressively. The results are presented here:  
5 
Alpha 

4 
3 
2 
1 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 
Bravo Charlie Delta 
Echo 
Foxtrot 

The average scores for each racer, from highest to lowest, along with their relative finish race ranking:  Charlie 3.8 1  
Delta 3.5 7  
Foxtrot 3.2 2  
Golf 3.2 3  
Bravo 3.0 5  
Alpha 2.4 4  
Echo 2.1 6 

This correlation was the most significant finding of the study and leads to the most important  recommendation that can be made to any singlehander entering a race: A skipper’s final ranking is  directly correlated to how aggressively he feels that he sails when compared to a normal afternoon race or  cruise. A skipper who feels that he sails more aggressively, more consistently than any other boat in the  race, has the greatest chance of winning.  
It is interesting to note that the level of aggressive sailing is not being judged by an independent third  party, but by the skippers themselves. What an inexperienced skipper reports as “aggressive” might be  considered “neutral” or “conservative” by a very experienced skipper. But this did not change the  correlation results for the race. It is the skipper’s own perception of his sailing that proved important.  
Referring in particular to boat Charlie, the overall race winner out of 23 boats: the graph shows a very  consistent reading of “Aggressively” with only two drops down to “the same” after the first day of the  race. While other boats had peaks into “Aggressively” and even “Very Aggressively,” they had greater  variability of reported results during the race with a large number of results in “the same” or  “conservatively” categories.  
Question #1 of the survey was “How are you feeling right now, in terms of pushing hard for the highest  possible speed: nervous(1), cautious(2), neutral(3), assertive(4), aggressive(5)?” This graph shows the  average responses for all seven racers every 12 hours:  
How are you feeling right now? 
4.0 
3.0 
2.0 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 
There is a large dip at the 36 hour point when exhaustion is kicking in, then levels climb through mid-race  and drop towards the end as racers understand their final positioning. Of note is the good 50% correlation  between this question and Question 8 on how aggressively each skipper sailed over the previous 12 hours.  
As a check on Q8 about sailing aggressively, Q9 was “Did you push beyond your comfort limit: no, once,  several times, many times”. Overall there was only an 18% correlation between the two questions. Thus  sailing aggressively does not mean sailing beyond the skippers’ comfort zone. 

It is important to understand, as seen in the chart above, that the race result was independent of the course  taken by the skipper. That is, as long as the skipper did not make a significant mistake in routing, the  course chosen was much less important than sailing aggressively in the final race results. This might be  
taken to indicate that excess time spent on weather forecasting and course routing is wasted.  
It should also be noted that each boats’ potential speed, as measured by its handicap rating, did not appear  to impact on final race ranking. Looking at all 23 competitors in the race, there was a negative 11%  correlation between handicap rating and race ranking. It is often thought that the weather during a  particular race favours fast boats or slow boats, but this was not the case with the 2012 SH Transpac.  
Boat Delta: In Chart 1, boat Delta is the southernmost track when nearing Hawaii. A record of the  course heading of each boat, taken every 12 hours of the entire race, gives the following Standard  Deviations, measured in degrees:  
Charlie 15°  
Foxtrot 15°  
Golf 10°  
Alpha 23°  
Bravo 13°  
Echo 9°  
Delta 22°  
(Boat Alpha, the northernmost track when nearing Hawaii, has an asymmetrical spinnaker thus by  necessity takes a very zig/zag course in the directly downwind trade winds. So Alpha should be ignored  in comparing course deviation.) 

Comparing with The Iditarod 
The Iditarod is an annual dog sled race from Anchorage to Nome, Alaska. Running for 1,112 miles the  race typically takes under two week to complete, about the same length as the Singlehanded Transpac.  The Iditarod trail is through a landscape of spruce forests, tundra, over hills and mountain passes and  across rivers. Most of the trail is through widely separated towns, villages and small settlements.  Although the racers can see people all along the route and there are numerous stopping points, it is a  solitary adventure, much like long distance singlehanded sailing. Given that the dogs are doing the work  (like the sails on a boat) and the musher is along for the ride (like a singlehanded skipper) the Iditarod is  perhaps the closest comparable sport to long distance racing from our point of view.  
An extensive study on the personality profiles of twenty-four Iditarod racers was performed during the  1988 and 1989 racesx. This was a standard “16PF”xi multiple choice personality questionnaire used to  measure sixteen fundamental traits of human personality. The test was completed by each musher a few  weeks before the race began. After the race, the results were broken into groups by how each finished in  the race: 1-10, 11-20, 21-30.  
The 1st-10th place finishers showed by a wide margin the highest score of all groups for the aggressive  Factor E. Factor E ranges from 1-“Submissive” to 10-“Dominant”. The top 10 finishers scored an  average of 9, compared to the 5 scored by racers 11th-20th, and 4 scored by racers 21st-30th. I believe that  this is an overwhelming match with the results of the singlehanded study discussed above; the direct  correlation between aggressive sailing and finish rank. Thus not only must a sailor be more aggressive  during the race, he must have a more aggressive personality in general.  
The top ten finishers also had a very high score of 8 for Factor F which is a ranking of 1-“Sober” to 10-  “Enthusiastic”. Racers 11th-20th ranked 5 and racers 21st-30th ranked 4 on this scale.  
Of Factor H, a ranking of 1-“Shy” to 10-“Bold”, the top ten finishers scored 8.5, compared to 5 for  racers 11th-20th and 4 for racers 21st-30th.  
Perhaps surprisingly on Factor Q3, a ranking of 1-“Group Oriented” to 10-“Self-sufficient”, the top ten  racers ranked 3, which is far more group oriented than the others: 8 for both 11th-20th and 21st-30th. The  Iditarod is a race with checkpoints including mandatory rest stops and supply restocking. Perhaps during  these periods, being team oriented is significantly more valuable than being self-sufficient. This might be  a cue for round-the-world singlehanded sailors, such as the Global-Ocean race, where teamwork and  cooperation during stop-over’s are an important part of winning. 

Experience  
Returning to the Singlehanded Transpac study, among the pre-race questions were three that attempted to  measure experience:  
“How many times have you sailed singlehanded in the past two years; 1-5, 6-20, 21-40, 41-70, 70+?”  “How many times have you raced or cruised to Hawaii on crewed boats?”  
“How many times have you flown a spinnaker while singlehanded in 15-20, 20-25, 25+ knots of wind?”  
The answers are presented below, in order of finish.  
 Times SH To Hawaii 15-20 knots 20-25 knots 25+ knots Charlie 1-5 14 Many times A few times Once  Foxtrot 41-70 0 A few times A few times Once  Golf 6-20 2 A few times Once Never  Alpha 6-20 1 A few times A few times Never  Bravo 1-5 19 Many times Many times A few times  Echo 6-20 1 Never Never Never  Delta 41-70 0 Many times A few times Never  
It is apparent that there is no correlation at all between race ranking and experience when measured on  one particular criterion, although when looking at all the items together there is a general feeling that the  more experience the better.  
Is winning important? I was told several times during this study that skippers are racing only for the  experience, rather than the podium. That they are simply making a checkmark on their bucket list. The  study itself refutes this point. In the pre-race questions 4 of the 7 respondents indicated a desire to  “Hopefully Win” and 2 wished to “Finish Respectfully”. Only 1 skipper wished to “Just Finish”.  
Another often held idea is that skippers use their first entry into the race as a learning experience or  practice for future success. Of the participants, boat Bravo had sailed the race 11 times previously and  Delta had sailed it one other time. This was the first Singlehanded Transpac for the other 5 boats. All  but Echo answered a strong “Yes” to the question “Do you have the financial resources and vacation time  to do this race several times over the coming years, if you desired: Yes, Possibly, Difficult, No?” Even  the skippers themselves might be thinking of their first attempt at the Transpac as a practice. But the race  records have proven this to be a false hope. Looking at the history of all Singlehanded Transpac races,  75% of skippers only complete the race one time. The Mini Transat race has an even higher attrition rate  where 90% only complete the race one time. In spite of skippers wishes, it is apparent that the financial  and effort requirements of doing the race are too high for repeats  
Thus we are left with the idea that (to quote from beer commercials) this is the skippers’ one shot at glory,  his one shot to grab the brass ring. While simple completion of the race will be talked of at the yacht club 

Confidence:  
Question 14 was “How confident are you that the boat can finish the race with no significant breakage?”  There was a medium 41% correlation between the responses and those to question 8 on sailing  aggressively.  
The open ocean is a lonely place for a singlehanded sailor. He has no one to rely on but himself if any of  the many things that can go wrong does. In this edition of the SH Transpac, one racer was rescued by a  passing ship when he reported a life threatening case of blood poisoning. In previous races masts have  been broken, a rudder lost, a boat hull has cracked and a storm led to a rescue on the return trip.  
These are very typical events in the life of a singlehander and all are perfectly valid reasons why a rookie  might have some worries. Regrettably, given the requirement for aggressive sailing in winning, any lack  of confidence in the boat must be overcome before race start.  
Boat Echo provides one extreme on the proof of this thread. Echo had the lowest level of confidence in  his boat; the lowest number of times when he pushed beyond his comfort limit; and reported the lowest  aggressive sailing rating. This led to Echo placing 2nd last among the group and an overall dissatisfaction  with his racing performance. He reported that he “stopped racing and started enjoying” the trip after just  the first couple of days. In the prerace survey, Echo reported that he singlehanded 6-20 times in the  previous two years and had never flown a spinnaker singlehanded in over 15 knots of wind.  
On the other extreme, Delta had the highest confidence in his boat and the second highest aggressive  report. Delta had sailed singlehanded 41-70 times in the previous two years and flown the chute many  times in 15-20 knots and a few times in 20+ knots.  
Confidence can only be gained on the water in challenging conditions. Singlehanded sailing in 10 knot  winds will teach a skipper to sail fast. But only sailing in 20, 25 or 30 knots will give the skipper  confidence. Race winner Charlie reported, “I had the chute up 24 hours a day for ten straight days. Rode  out every squall (maybe 15 of them?) with the chute up.” Charlie had gained his confidence in 14  previous trips to Hawaii, albeit with crew. He had a clear understanding of what a boat can handle and he  pushed it to the limit. Charlie was only in the middle of the confidence ranking but was at the top of the  aggressive ranking. This shows that he pushed beyond even his own confidence level. This is what it  takes to win a race – having high confidence and pushing beyond it anyway.  
Self-Sponsorship:  
All but a very few transoceanic singlehanded skippers are amateur. However many (particularly in  Transatlantic races) do gain some level of sponsorship from corporations to help offset expenses. None  the less, there is no question that each skipper has invested a very large amount of his own money and an  even larger amount of work effort in getting to the starting line. Thus the skipper himself or perhaps his 

The survey participants spent an average of about $20,000 to complete the Transpac. This works out to  $9.43 per nautical mile or $65 an hour, 24-hours a day, sleeping and awake, sailing, cooking, reading.  Each skipper must ask, “Based on the amount of money it is costing, will my sponsor be happy with my  effort over the past day, the past hour, the past ten minutes? Perhaps each singlehanded skipper should  post a big sign in the cockpit “$9.43 per Nautical Mile”  
The disconnect:  
I was watching video of the Volvo Ocean Race, considered the highest level of crewed long distance  racing, and noticed a huge disconnect with singlehanded racing: In every VOR video there was a  crewman hunched over the grinder. Every thirty seconds or so, this crewman would grind the sheets in or  out making small adjustments to sail trim to increase boat speed. When significant events, such as  broaches, occurred the crewman would immediately jump up from his fallen position and get back on the  grinder.xii I asked a VOR crewman how he was able to maintain his motivation to stand at the grinder  many hours a day. He replied that if he didn’t do it, there were a thousand other sailors at the next  stopover waiting to take his place.  
On the other hand, video of the Vendee Globe, considered to be the highest level of singlehanded long  distance racing, shows the complete opposite. Videos show the skipper sitting at the nav-station below  deck or gazing off into the distance at the scenery. During her famous 2000-2001 Vendee Globe race,  
Ellen MacArthur blogged that she was spending 8 hours a day at her nav-station, forecasting weather. I  sent her an e-mail asking what she was doing in 8 hours that could not be done in ½ hour? She replied  “nothing”. (MacArthur placed 2nd in the race and later set a world record for singlehanded  circumnavigation.) It appears that sitting at the nav-station was considered to be acceptable sailing.  Another sailor friend, Bruce Schwab, circumnavigated in the 2002 Around Alone and 2004 Vendee Globe  races. When asked if he helmed the boat, he replied that he did so for short periods, but then went below  to “get back to racing.”  
The question becomes obvious: If constant attention to sail trim is not important for boat speed, the  Volvo Ocean Racers could significantly reduce cost and weight by cutting their crew size by half. On the  other hand, if constant attention to sail trim is important, why are singlehanded sailors ignoring it? Why  are singlehanders relying on the autopilot to perform the same functions as the entire on-deck crew?  
Skippers must understand that the autopilot steers the boat, it does not sail the boat. The most advanced  autopilots have functions that enable them to learn and adapt to wave movements, but no autopilot has  any understanding of boat speed. The autopilot does not know that the wind has dropped by 1 knot and  boat speed has fallen by ½ knot, or that wind speed has increased by 1 knot and VMG has fallen by ¼  knot. The autopilot does not know that chop has increased so the boat is slowing by ½ knot with each 

It is very easy to study and test these conditions. During an afternoon with normal fluctuations of wind  speed and direction, a skipper can set the autopilot, trim the sails and watch boat speed rise and fall. For  example, a skipper might know from her polarsxiii that maximum boat speed is 5.5 knots when beating  into 8 knots of true wind, so she hand steers to the correct wind angle, sets her sail trim perfectly, gets her  speed up to 5.5 and sets the autopilot by apparent wind angle. The first thing she notices is that boat  speed drops down to 5.3 with no changes to wind conditions – this is just a normal fluctuation, but it  represents ½ day extra on a trip to Hawaii. She then notices that if the true wind speed fluctuates within  a normal range and drops to 6, the boat speed falls dramatically to 4 knots. This is a 25% decrease in boat  speed and represents an extra 3 days on a trip to Hawaii. Then she sees that if the wind picks up to 10, the  boat heals over and the GPS notes that her Velocity Made Good (VMG) drops by half a knot because the  boat is making extra leeway. As well, she notices that the autopilot has pushed the tiller to windward,  adding extra braking power to the rudder.  
After watching the autopilot perform for a half hour, the skipper takes matters into her own hands. Once  again she steers up to 5.5 in 8 knots of wind. Every time she notices a small wave ahead, she heads down  a little to build power and keeps her speed steady. If she was really energetic she might also work the  backstay to maintain power. Of course every time her boat speed changes, the apparent wind speed also  changes and she makes tiny adjustments to sail trim to keep boat speed up at the highest level. When the  wind speed drops to 6, she watches the telltales and sails down by 4° to keep boat speed at 5. (She knows  from her polars that the boat can beat into 8 knots about 4° closer than it can beat into 6 knots. Rather  than allowing the autopilot to pinch, she has gained an extra knot of speed.) When the wind increases to  10, she eases her main and jib sheets by a few inches to add twist and maintain the optimum boat heal, but  can now head up by 2° and increase boat speed to 6. This also serves to reduce pressure on the tiller and  she maintains the light touch that ensures no braking and maximum speed.  
Heading back home, she turns downwind and launches the spinnaker. From the polars, she knows that  the boat can travel at 5.5 at the optimum wind angle of 140° in 8 knots so she sets her autopilot and  watches. The only way she can allow the autopilot to sail the boat is by trimming the spinnaker sheet  until the chute does not collapse with a normal, small wind shift. But this means that for the 90% of the  time that the wind is not shifting or gusting, the sheet is too tight. This in turn means that the boat is  sailing slower than possible. So our intrepid skipper is never able to reach the polar boat speed of 5.5.  She only gets up to 5.2. But she continues to watch. When the wind drops to 6, boat speed drops to 4.  But then the wind gusts to 10, the first thing that happens is the boat rounds up in a broach. Of course it  will – the massive spinnaker is trimmed for a higher point of sail and the boat will always head up to  where the sail is trimmed. After regaining control (which takes a couple of minutes) her boat speed rises  to 6 which seems good until another boat passes by sailing 8° further downwind. 

All of the above figures are based on the polar diagrams and experience with my own boat. This is a very  accurate description of a typical afternoon on the water. Wind speed fluctuations of 1 or 2 knots and  wind shifts of 10° transpire every few minutes under normal conditions. These examples show that even  if the boat is sailing perfectly, the skipper who sets the autopilot and goes below is giving up a very  significant amount of boat speed, boat control and VMG to the skipper who is actively involved in sailing  the boat. In addition, boat polar diagrams work on the assumption that sails are trimmed perfectly. Every  change in wind speed does not simply require a change in boat direction, but also a change in sail trim.  Any experienced skipper knows the joy of watching boat speed rise by half a knot just because the main  sheet has been eased by 3”.  
The facts about boat speed are clear, even to the racers themselves. Perhaps the most telling question of  the survey was:” If you had been in the perfect racing frame of mind and had sailed as fast as possible  with your abilities while you were awake, could you have increased your 12 hour average speed by: 0  knots, 0.1 knots, 0.5 knots, 1 knot, 2 knots?”  
2 
Alpha 
1.5 
Bravo 
1 
Charlie 
Delta 
0.5 
Echo 
0 
Foxtrot
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 
From the overall chart, it can be seen that boats Bravo and Charlie (the race winner) consistently show a  potential speed increase of only 0.1 knots. Bravo has sailed this race 13 times and Charlie has sailed to  Hawaii in crewed races 16 times. But removing them from the study to show the less experienced  skippers is more revealing:  

1.5 
Alpha 
Delta 
1 
Echo 
0.5 
Foxtrot 
Golf
0 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 
The vast majority of less experienced reports indicate potential speed increase of .5 knots or 1 knot, with  significant numbers at 2 knots. (Note that boat Delta reported the second highest average potential speed  increase of 0.9 knots, second only to Alpha’s 1.3. Alpha is a much faster boat with handicap rating of - 123, compared to the average of 141. Delta’s 0.9, along with its wide variation of course might indicate a  general dissatisfaction with course selection and speed achieved.)  
Do these numbers make a difference? The Mini Transat has the greatest number of entrants with 75  competitors in two boat classes. An examination of the results of the past four races shows that an  increase in speed by just over 0.2 knots would improve the average placement by 10 positions. Is it  worth the extra effort of 0.2 knots of boat speed to move from 17th to 7th? Most racers would think so.  
We should also look at what the above potential speed increases would have meant to each boat in miles,  time reduction and final ranking (assuming that each boat had met his potential speed in isolation), when  compared to all 23 boats in the Transpac.  
Boat Miles Time Reduction Change from potential speed increase Charlie 31 4 hrs saved. Actual 1st overall  
Foxtrot 266 33 hrs saved. Moved from 7th to 1st overall  Golf 173 22 hrs saved. Moved from 10th to 2nd overall  Alpha 222 29 hrs saved. Moved from 13th to 7th overall  Bravo 66 9 hrs saved. Moved from 14th to 12th overall  Echo 200 27 hrs saved. Moved from 17th to 8th overall  Delta 268 38 hrs saved. Moved from 18th to 6th overall  
In the Vic-Maui crewed race, skippers reported that they would not be able to increase their speed at all,  other than during a few boat damage situations. That is, every boat in the Vic-Maui was reported to be  racing at 100% of potential for nearly the entire race. I believe, and my own extensive experience racing  against crewed boats shows, that there is no reason why a singlehander should be sailing at anything less  than the boat’s full potential, at least while the skipper is awake.  

100% 

80% 
60% 
40% 
20% 
0% 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 
Alpha Bravo Charlie Delta 
Echo 
Foxtrot Golf 

Two results jump out. The vast majority of responses indicate that the racer was in “the zone” of sailing  50% or less of their awake time. The average rating amongst all skippers was 35%. The highest average  was 66% and the lowest was 8%. Also notable are the wide swings within each skipper’s results,  jumping up and down by significant amounts in-between each report. This returns us to the earlier  question of by how much could each racer have improved his average speed if he had been in “the zone”  for an extra 25% or 50% of their time on the water? .  
The opposite behaviour was also studied with the question “What percentage of awake time did you  relax/read/watch movies/radio chat or just chill out?  
100% 
Alpha 
80% 
Bravo 
60% 
Charlie 
Delta 
40% 
Echo 
20% 
Foxtrot 
0% 
Golf 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 
It is abundantly clear from the survey results and from my own experience that there is a very strong  tendency to let the autopilot “sail” the boat, rather than just “steer” the boat.  
Given the percentage of time in the zone of sailing and the percentage of time relaxing, the question of  each skippers satisfaction with their performance comes to fore. Question 2 asked “How satisfied are you  with your performance over the past 12 hours: very disappointed(1), disappointed(2), neutral(3),  satisfied(4), very satisfied(5)? The twice daily results are averaged below, together with the race ranking: 

Foxtrot 2 3.07  
Golf 3 3.34  
Alpha 4 3.79  
Bravo 5 2.87  
Echo 6 2.88  
Delta 7 3.21  
Boat Alpha had the highest satisfaction rating at 3.79, even though he placed 13th overall in the race.  Even the race winner, Charlie, was only slightly higher than “neutral” about his performance over the  duration of the race. Not one racer even reached the point of “satisfied” on average. The results show  only a mild 30% correlation between performance satisfaction and final results. It appears that the  skippers are reasonable but not excellent judges of their own performance.  
More importantly, it shows that the mindset of the race acknowledges “neutral” as acceptable. This race  is costing the skippers on the order of $9.43 for every passing mile, but not one of them drove himself or  his boat hard enough to be “satisfied” with his performance. Perhaps if the racers had been in the zone of  
sailing for longer periods, had hit their potential speed more often and had relaxed a little less, they would  have been more satisfied with their performance.  
Having completed some 250 afternoon and evening races singlehanded, there were very few in which I  was not satisfied with my performance even though I have rarely won. After each race I would know if I  tried my best, and would analyze my performance for the next time. This is the type of strategy that  should be undertaken after each 12 hour reporting period of a long distance race. Each skipper should  make a decision on his level of satisfaction and adjust his performance over the next period accordingly.  In the post race report, Golf commented “I compared what I was doing/seeing with my ideal of what  should be done & then analyzed the gaps.”  
The next question, #3, was “How do you feel about the coming 12 hours: highly motivated, determined,  relaxed, discouraged, dejected” Did the response to this pan out in the next 12 hours? The vast majority  of responses to Q3 were “Determined”. However there was a 38% correlation between Q3 and the  following 12 hour period response to Q2. This is a medium correlation level on this type of question. It  appears to some extent the skippers did adjust performance. However, there was no correlation at all  between each skippers’ responses to Q3 and their final race ranking.  
Much of this paper has promoted the idea that a boat should be actively sailed to reach its potential speed.  I believe this would be true even for the race winner; Charlie. Even though he only reported a potential  for 0.1 knots of extra speed, one wonders if his laissez faire approach would have held if he had faced a  competitor 100 metres away, i.e. if another skipper in an identical boat had been stuck on his starboard  bow. Would Charlie have sailed that little bit harder to get away from the mystery boat? 0.1 knots is a  significant distance when measured over 15 days. 

Surprising to first time long distance singlehanded racers it just how boring it can be. Once the initial  euphoria of starting the race has past, the skipper faces the experience of having only his own company  for days on end. This is probably the first time in his life with a total lack of someone to talk with. It is  “small talk” that makes life bearable for the social human animal. When this boredom is added to the  general lack of sleep prevalent in all singlehanded races and the heat of the tropical sun, it becomes a self perpetuating cycle of energy drain and lethargy.  
Lethargy is not the same thing as “tired” although they are related. Tired can be cured with sleep and we  understand that lack of sleep is integral to singlehanded sailing.xiv It is also very possible to be tired and  energetic at the same time, if necessity pushes the skipper to activity. In his first circumnavigation,  Derek Hatfield was well past exhaustion nearing Cape Horn; “He had been at the helm for almost twenty four hours and was so exhausted he could barely think…”xv But just a short time afterwards Hatfield  pitch-poled and had enough of an adrenalin boost, lasting over several hours, to detach the broken mast  and rigging and motor into the islands, all while fighting against forty foot waves.  
Lethargy is better defined as being lazy, sluggish or indifferent. Lethargy is what a man feels when he  lays on the chesterfield on a Saturday afternoon watching NASCAR on TV and is too much of a sloth to  get a beer from the fridge, so he asks his wife. The problem is not lack of sleep, it is lack of motivation.  
Lethargy is an absolute killer of boat speed because it pulls the skipper away from the tiller and sheets for  long periods of time. Every time a skipper watches the telltales flutter, but knows that the situation will  correct itself in 30 seconds or a minute, he is experiencing lethargy. Even worse, lethargy is what tells  the skipper that he should go and read a book in the shade of the mainsail, rather than sit in the hot sun in  the cockpit.  
  
The study asked “What percentage of time feel energetic?” and “What percentage of time did you feel  lethargic?” This graph presents the average results (with the boat Golf removed to be explained below).  
80% 
60% 

40% 
20% 
0% 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 
Energetic Lethargic 

In this graph of the average results, the odd numbers on the bottom represent the evening reports covering  the previous daytime. The even numbers on the bottom represent the morning reports, covering the  previous nighttimes. 

Energy level has a medium (32%)xvi correlation with sailing aggressively when all data points are  compared. This jumps to 43% if Charlie is ignored. Charlie reported the highest level of aggressive  sailing. However he noted: “Heavy boat that doesn't surf is relatively easy to keep at full speed - a .1  change in boat speed for a non surfing boat is quite a bit. I also noted from discussions with others that  very few people had full sail area 24x7 (full main, big jenny, then chute). Lots of folks mentioned reefing  in day 2 and 3 - and taking down the chute for hours each day if not all night. I had the chute up 24 hours  a day for ten straight days. Rode out every squall (maybe 15 of them?) with the chute up (though takes  specific squall strategy to make this work). Basically I had all the same sails up as I would if fully  crewed. Also my autopilot with gyro helms better than most of my typical PacCup crew. The boat was  set-up to sail near full speed without my being at the helm - and the reduced crew weight made her faster  than in a crewed race in many conditions.” So it appears that Charlie was able to sail very aggressively  without a high energy level.  
Improving Energy: The skipper of Golf reported the highest energy and lowest lethargy levels by a wide  margin. Before the race and as a part of the study, Golf’s skipper was instructed in three techniques for  improving energy. This graph is a comparison between Golf and the other racers. Clearly he was  showing far more energy and far less lethargy than any other racer. This result is a very significant part  of the study and should be clearly understood by all future racers.  
100% 
80% 

60% 
40% 
20% 
0% 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 
Avg Energetic Avg Lethargic Golf Energy Golf Lethargic 

Golf was instructed in a program of: iron supplements; nuts and moderate exercise:  
Iron:xvii Iron is an essential component of proteins involved in oxygen transport. A deficiency of iron  limits oxygen delivery to cells, resulting in fatigue, poor work performance, and decreased immunity.  Almost two-thirds of iron in the body is found in haemoglobin, the protein in red blood cells that carries 

Nuts:xviii Nuts are loaded with protein, a great source of energy, but it tends to work more slowly than  carbohydrates. Protein does not provide a quick energy fix, but it keeps us going for the long haul.  
Another nutrient found in nuts is coenzyme CoQ10. This is a nutrient that helps our cells produce  energy. It is also an antioxidant, which means that it protects our cells from damage caused by oxidative  stress. Our bodies produce some CoQ10 naturally, but the amount decreases with age.  
Nuts also contain Omega 3 fatty acids, a category of unsaturated fats which provide energy to the muscles  and organs. They also store energy for the body and help lower LDL, the so-called "bad" cholesterol.  Nuts are one of the best sources of this class of fatty acids.  
Golf ate a cup of cashews, almonds and peanuts daily as his snack food.  
Moderate Exercise:xix Exercise will help to increase energy levels in both the long and short term. In the  short term doing a little exercise helps greatly by getting the blood pumping around the system and the  oxygen flowing. If a racer is feeling lethargic then chances are that the system is static and not pumping  that blood around. Jumping around a bit to ‘kick start’ the body back into action and start to feel vigorous  again.  
I have found a very significant immediate energy boost simply by walking in place in the cockpit for just  ten minutes and only lifting my feet by a few inches. The goal is to get blood moving to the brain,  without exhausting the body. Thus moderate exercise is more appropriate to the long distance  singlehander than vigorous exercise. Golf reported increased energy from daily running in place in the  cabin while holding onto the ceiling grab rails.  
Another natural energy supplement, but not tested during this study is Ginseng Root: xx A Mayo Clinic led study found that high doses of the herb American ginseng over two months reduced cancer-related  fatigue in patients,. At four weeks, the pure ginseng provided only a slight improvement in fatigue  symptoms. However, at eight weeks, ginseng offered cancer patients significant improvement in general  exhaustion — feelings of being "pooped," "worn out," "fatigued," "sluggish," "run-down," or "tired" —  compared to the placebo group. "After eight weeks, we saw a 20-point improvement in fatigue in cancer  patients, measured on a 100-point, standardized fatigue scale," Dr. Barton says. The herb had no apparent  side effects, she says.  
I believe that the lethargy experienced during a long distance race is comparable to that felt by a cancer  patient, so the Mayo Clinic study into the benefits of ginseng are appropriate for singlehanders. Ginseng  is the active ingredient in the energy boosting drink Cheetah Power Surge that promises rapid energy with  “no caffeine and no caffeine crash.”xxi 
Carnitinexxii, also not a part of this study: “Patients taking chemotherapy drugs can deplete levels of  carnitine, a natural substance in the body. Scientists at the Urbino Hospital in Italy found that a pineapple-

In the crewed Vic-Maui race, the skippers reported that their on-deck crew was operating 100%  energetically for most of the reports, with the occasional dip down to the 75% energy level. This is  obviously substantially higher than the reports for the singlehanded race and may be a key reason that  there was no room for speed improvement in the Vic-Maui boats. Clearly energy is important to racing  and any steps a skipper can take to improve energy will not only improve his speed, but will also  substantially improve his emotional state during the race.  
Mindfulness:  
The current state of the art in the psychology of athletic performance enhancement is based on the  concept of “Mindfulness”. In brief, mindfulness is a condition where the athlete is able to engage in a  present-moment focus on the task at hand for extended periods without distraction from extraneous  factors. It does not attempt to block these extraneous factors. Rather it allows them to pass through the  athlete’s mind with no effect. That is, they are simply passing events no more important than a bird  flying overhead. If a sailor can allow a seagull to fly past with no impact on his concentration, can he  allow any other thoughts to also fly past with no distraction?  
We should consider driving a car for long distances, perhaps an eight hour trip of steady driving with just  one bathroom break. For the length of this trip we are able to concentrate on keeping a vehicle in  between the white lines that are only one metre on either side, while we are driving at 100kph with other  cars driving in the opposite direction just two metres away. Somehow thousands of drivers, in particular  long-haul truck drivers, perform this act of mindfulness every day.  
During this eight hour trip a thousand thoughts pass through our mind: “Do I need to move money into  the chequing account to make the mortgage payment; my arm aches; I’ve got to fix that leaky gutter.”  Each of these thoughts passes and is considered briefly before being shunted elsewhere. Our mind has  given itself the ability to complete an incredibly complex task, driving at 100kph, with many thoughts  passing harmlessly and not impacting the necessary concentration. At any moment we can react  immediately to a deer running across the highway.  
However, once in a while a more significant thought enters the mind: “Is my wife having an affair? She  seems to be on the phone every night and has been spending a lot of time at the yacht club. What is she  doing right now?” It is during these periods when we do not have the solution within our own  consciousness that the world seems to pass by without notice. All of our concentration is focused on the  issue and not on driving. These are the times when we hit a deer or drift across the white line into  oncoming traffic. This is also the reason that talking on a cell phone is so dangerous; it allows extraneous  factors to become the ‘present-moment focus’ instead of remaining engaged in the act of driving.  Distracted driving is virtually tied with alcohol and speed as the leading cause of traffic death. One can  imagine how difficult it would be for a golfer to hit the perfect shot if someone in the crowd shouted,  “Your wife is having an affair!” 

In the same way, mindfulness also refers to attention to the present moment rather than allowing the mind  to wander into the past or future. Returning to our roadway example, five minutes ago the driver needed  to cross the centre line while passing a group of cyclists. Likewise the weather forecast calls for heavy  rain this afternoon and he will need to be more cautious. The driver’s awareness of these past and future  situations does not cause him to drive off the road now. His mindfulness of the current situation keeps  him driving safely for every moment of the trip.  
Thankfully, in singlehanded sailing the threshold of required mindfulness is even lower than for driving.  Technology in autopilots enables us to completely ignore sailing altogether. We can actually go to sleep  while the boat continues to sail. But this is a two edged sword. In high performance racing, technology  
has become the problem rather than the solution. In allowing us to walk away from the tiller, it has  allowed us to walk away from all the aspects of sailing that make the boat go fast.  
An interesting comparison can be made with the America’s Cup World Series. The level of concentration  required by the entire crew in those short duration races equals that of professional golf. For example, if a  crewman were to fumble pulling in the jib sheet because he was distracted by his wife’s affair, his boat  would fall behind by just one boat length – enough to lose the race. Even at the highest level, long  distance singlehanded sailing does not require the mindfulness of a golfer about to make the perfect swing  or an ACWS crewman in mid-tack. It would be more accurate to say that a long distance singlehanded  sailor is very well served with the mindfulness of a truck driver. All he needs is stay within the white  lines (i.e. keep the inside and outside telltales flying with each change in wind direction) while he adjusts  his foot on the gas pedal for every hill and valley (i.e. trim or ease the sheets with each change in wind  strength). Thankfully the singlehander is not likely to cause an accident and death even if he does ignore  the telltales completely.  
Mindfulness-Acceptance-Commitment (MAC) approach: In earlier years, sports psychologists  considered that optimum performance would be obtained by the avoidance of destructive thoughts; that is  negative thoughts or emotions should be controlled, eliminated or replaced. This was based on studies  that showed high performance athletes are less anxious, more confident and experience fewer negative  thoughts. What followed was the assumption that interventions should work to replace negative thoughts  with positive thoughts. Unfortunately, subsequent studies did not show that a reduction in negative  thought consistently resulted in enhanced performance. In fact they showed that the suppression of one  negative thought actually resulted in a triggering process whereby the athlete actively searched for signs  of negative cognitive activity and then brought these to the forefront where it could subsequently be  suppressed. I.e. the mind was being trained to seek out and destroy negative thoughts, but this only ended  in more seeking and thus more finding of negative thoughts. The result was that rather than concentrating 

The current proposal is to advocate the acceptance, rather than suppression, of these destructive thoughts.  Internal thoughts are viewed as naturally occurring events that regularly come and go in normal  experience. Mindful based techniques emphasize the development of non-judgmental attention to all of  these thoughts. That is, all thoughts are noticed but not evaluated as being good or bad, right or wrong.  This allows the thoughts to pass without impacting on performance. To give an extreme example, the  thought “my wife is having an affair” has the same value level as “I need to moving money from savings  to chequing to make this month’s mortgage payment” and “I need to fix the gutter.” I.e. they all have no  value at all. None of them are good or bad. None of them are right or wrong. Thoughts remain simply  thoughts – words in our heads. Our present-moment focus, then, can more easily be trained on our  actions: sailing the boat.  
Of course it is not only thoughts from outside the race that can lead to distraction. A hundred  considerations within the race itself can lead to the same negative effect. “I’m hungry; this seat is  damned uncomfortable; Jim has gotten way ahead and I’ll never be able to catch him; I screwed up on my  weather forecast and went too far south; I’m worried about the squalls tonight.” Each of these might  distract a skipper and take his mind off of the key goal of sailing fast. But the skipper who practices the  concepts of mindfulness will let each current issue pass by without any value judgement, and will  concentrate on the here and now, rather than dwell on past mistakes or future worries.  
Emotional flare-ups are common in long distance singlehanding. Racers report intense crying jags lasting  several hours during which real or imagined external and internal factors take control of the mind.xxiii  This is exactly the type of situation where mindfulness can be of benefit. The skipper can learn to allow  the thought “I miss my wife” to pass by with the same non-value attachment as the seagull flying  overhead.  
Once we have accepted the premise of this paper, that it is better to actively sail the boat rather than  letting the autopilot do all the work, the ideas behind mindfulness allow the singlehander to stay at the  helm or on the sheets for longer periods. If the skipper is able to maintain the level of mindfulness of a  long-haul trucker, with his eyes on the telltales and his hands on the sheets or tiller, he will be able to sail  much faster than the skipper who allows himself to be constantly distracted.  
I am not proposing that singlehanders hand steer for the entire race. I am suggesting that skippers share  the load with the autopilot for as long as possible, in the same way that the pit-crew shares the load with  the helmsman on a crewed boat. There are times when allowing the autopilot to steer while working the  sheets would be most beneficial. There are other times when hand steering would add the greatest speed. 

One of the most common maxims in sailing is that a race occurs any time two boats are in sight, moving  in the same direction. Every skipper has a natural inclination to show that he is as good as, or better than  the skipper in the next boat. In almost any sport, racers are told to train against a partner because it will  set up the natural competitive instinct of every human being. Unfortunately, the corollary is that no race  occurs when there is no other boat.  
A significant problem in long distance sailing is the lack of any competitor in sight. After the first few  hours of the race, each boat is on a seemingly empty ocean with nothing on the horizon but seagulls. The  fact that each boat is taking a different route to the finish, and that each boat is racing with a different  handicap rating, add to the problem. It is exceedingly difficult to maintain a competitive attitude in these  circumstances. Twice daily position reports, with latitudes and longitudes hand written on a pad or  plotted on a chart, do not offer a level of incentive to racers.  
The feeling is that on a crewed boat, energetic crewmates will push each other to higher performance with  different crewmates taking the encouraging role at different times and no crewman wanting to be seen as  slacking. This would be another reason why crewed boats in the study were energetic nearly 100% of the  time and could not add to their average speed by being in the perfect racing frame of mind. They are  already in that frame of mind.  
Racers can take several steps to increase the feeling of active racing and thus keep themselves at the  highest level of performance.  
First, while seated in the cockpit with a hand on the tiller or on the sheets, skippers must keep a constant  eye on the knot meter. It is very easy for speed to drop by ½ or 1 knot with no audible change in water  passing by the boat. Speed drops at this level are a constant part of sailing, even with an autopilot.  Skippers must watch the knot meter and make the immediate corrections to sail trim and heading to  maintain top speed. A few minutes here and there with the speed at one knot below optimum can quickly  add up.  
Second, each skipper must have a copy of her boat’s polars on hand and must push to sail to the polars.  These graphs represent the best possible speed for each boat design and will give the skipper immediate  feedback on her sailing ability.  
Third, sail to the best possible speed of the moment. I find it best to watch the knot meter looking for  spikes of speed, and then sail to match these spikes. For example if while sailing at 5.9 I notice a spike to  6.2, I will do everything possible to regain and retain this level. I say to myself, “if I can reach 6.2 once,  why can’t I do it continuously?”  
Racing against reports Most races allow for only twice daily reporting of positions. It is vitally  important for every skipper to record all of the competitors’ positions so that he has a ready reference to  how he is doing. Nothing could be more disappointing than to lose a race by a small amount only 

Handicap racing provides the extra challenge in that the closest competitor’s boat might be a day or two  in front or behind. The final result is only known when the corrected time is taken. For example in the  SH Transpac, the overall ranking for 3rd and 4th place was a difference of 2½ hours on corrected time, or  
0.1 knots. However the handicap ratings were such that the 3rd place boat finished 2½ days after the 4th place boat. I have developed a spread sheet methodology that takes the handicap rating into account and  allows each boat to know their standing at any point in the race.  
The calculation:  
∙ At each report of the race, take the actual miles sailed towards the finish line by each boat up to  that point in the race. This can be done by subtracting the total race length from the Distance to  Finish. (We are only concerned with each boat’s speed toward the finish, not any extra miles  they cover to gain a weather advantage.)  
∙ Take all of these numbers and average the result for all the boats. Set this average mileage as a  "Standard Race".  
∙ Divide the actual distance travelled towards the finish line by the actual time of the race to find  the Actual Speed of each boat on the race to date.  
∙ Based on their Actual Speed, calculate each boat’s corrected finish time for the Standard Race.  o Use the normal Time-On-Distance formula to calculate each boat’s Corrected Time for  the Standard Race.  
The time-on-distance formula is: TA =(Standard Race Length x PHRF)/ 60  
Actual Time – TA = Corrected Time  
At this point we have the Corrected Time for each boat in the Standard Race.  
∙ Divide the Actual distance traveled by each boat by its Corrected Time. This gives the Corrected  Speed for each boat.  
∙ Multiple the Actual Hours since the start of the race by each boat’s Corrected Speed. This will  give a Corrected Distance traveled by each boat.  
∙ Compare the Corrected Distance for each boat to determine the relative placing of each boat at  any point in the race. This should give a fairly good indication of how many corrected miles sits  in between each boat in the race.  
The above calculation is long, but it can easily be set up in a spread sheet before the race and only the  DTF figures need be entered at each report. The spread sheet will instantly output the result.  
Race against herself. Top level marathon runners use this method when competitors are out of viewxxiv.  Each runner knows their own potential speed (like the polars of a boat) and uses a stopwatch to pass mile markers on the race at a specific rate. They can break a race down to individual miles of running and  work to match their best possible performance for each mile. A singlehander can use the Man Over  Board feature on their GPS and a stopwatch to help with this process by setting up a continuous series of  20 minute races. The skipper pushes the MOB button and takes one of two approaches: She can watch  for a specific distance to pass, two nautical miles might be appropriate, and time the duration of her race.  Or she can sail for a set period, such as 20 minutes, and watch the distance covered. She must 

Each past race segment represents a new competitor against whom she is racing in the current segment. If  she betters the last race segment, she wins that little race. If she does not match the last segment, she  loses the race and must try harder the next time. She should do a series of nine of these race segments  over three hours before taking a break. Each segment represents a new competitor’s boat on her course,  so she must write down every segment result on the white board. After nine segments in the morning, she  can take a sanity break to get something to eat, before starting the process again for her afternoon race  series.  
She should look at each three hour period as an intense set of races, just like a set of round-the-buoy races  at her yacht club. And she should dedicate the same level of concentration and intensity to it.  
Two considerations are important. The distance or duration of each race segment must be sufficiently  short that it does not allow the skipper to leave the tiller and do other functions, like get a coffee. These  periods are intended to be intense, short duration races where the skipper concentrates solely on boat  speed. However they should be long enough that normal fluctuations in wind do not impact the  performance over the entire duration of the race. Inside each segment she can watch the knot meter to try  to match her highest speed, but knowing that more important than staying at 6.2 is cutting down the time  needed to cover 2 nautical miles.  
Sea and wind conditions might change over the entire three-hour race period, but they will not change  sufficiently from one segment to the next to nullify the comparison.  
Also the skipper should not make any course changes during the three hour race series. This idea is to  cover the greatest possible distance on a particular point of sail. A runner would not include a flat and a  hill within a 1 mile measurement. Likewise a sailor should not include any course changes. A course  change would slow the boat and the race result would not be measurable against the other segments.  
Autopilots: the weakest link in the chain  
There is a second reason why sailors must understand the need for non-reliance on the autopilot; because  it is the least reliable piece of equipment on the boat. In some cases, the autopilot cannot handle the  wind/wave conditions facing the boat. This was the situation facing the boat Hotel in the Transpac.  Quoting from the logs. “I was so exhausted last night I let the boat go way south in exchange for 3 hours  of solid sleep. On my planned heading, the autopilot kept rounding up every time a gust or big wave hit,  which meant no sleep” 

depleting my batteries in the first two, I was left to hand steer with no other real alternative if I wanted to  keep racing. I hand steered 60 out of 72 hours for a 20 hour/ day average over 3 days. I hit my mental and  physical breaking point a few times, dropping both sails and collapsing in the cockpit.  
It is difficult to imagine how a marathon runner could expect to win if he decided to stop running and rest  on the park bench for a couple of minutes. The solution to this situation is amazingly simple and well  known, requiring nothing more than a $3 piece of surgical tubing.xxv While this emergency self steering  system is not claiming to be as fast as an autopilot, it is a lot faster than dropping sails and sitting adrift.  
In other situations: “Wind! Finally it decided to show up! 18-22 knots. Boat speed averaging in mid to  upper 8′s all night, recklessly over-canvassed. Autopilot could not keep up and would begin oscillating  the boat horribly.” And: “Autopilot was too slow to drive with spinnaker in moderate seas and 20 knots of  breeze. I remember being below, feeling a roundup coming and sticking my head out to look at the  autopilot and yell: “You got that?” Much of the time, the answer was no.” And: “When one of the squalls  passes the wind speed picks up and the boat wants to round up and the auto pilot can’t handle so I jump  on to hand steer again.” And “The autopilot is leaving a bit to be desired with the spinnaker up. So far, I  figure that I’m about 20% faster than the pilot on average. That really hurts when it comes to standings in  the race.” My own experience is very much the same. It is a known fact that all auto pilots have limits  when a boat is being pushed to its maximum. Competitive racers must accept that there will be many  hours when they must steer with one hand and keep the other on the sheet. The speed of the boat must be  determined only by what the boat, sails and skipper can handle, not by the autopilot – the weakest link in  the chain. 

Skippers must understand the overwhelming requirement that in order to win, they must keep moving  towards the finish line. Small equipment failures are a normal part of racing and every skipper must be  able to handle them without slowing.  
Comfort 
If one was to design a method of torture; sitting on a hard piece of plastic, covered in 40-grit sand paper,  sixteen hours a day in soaking wet pants, would be an effective starting point. Round-the-world  singlehanded racers are known to install very comfortable executive chairs reminiscent of Captain Kirk  inside the cabin. This only encourages the skipper to spend more time out of the cockpit and away from  actually sailing the boat. It is very rare for anyone to make even the smallest adaptation to the cockpit to  allow for comfortable seating hours on end. Professional race cars install ergonomic seats designed  specifically for each driver in a race that lasts only three hours. But singlehanded sailors are expected to  sit on a section of ridged, stippled plastic for the duration of a transoceanic race. The sheer pain of it will  drive even the hardiest skipper away from the tiller after a few hours.  
If we accept that effective racing includes actually sailing the boat for extended periods, then skippers  must take steps to improve cockpit comfort for long duration sitting. Such seating must be comfortable  on the bum, provide proper back support, allow for the movement necessary to sail the boat and have  sufficient drainage to remove water immediately. Homemade solutions include cutting the legs off of a  plastic deck chair and adding wooden cross slats with carpeting on the bottom. Another solution is a bean  bag chair using closed cell foam pellets and lawn chair fabric. West Marine offers a Go-Anywhere seat  that seems to provide back support.  
Conclusion 
This has been the first in-depth study done specifically on the psychological factors required to win a long  distance singlehanded sailboat race. The study showed a very strong correlation between sailing  aggressively and final race ranking. This result was backed up with a study from the Iditarod dog sled  race showing that the most aggressive mushers had a better finish than those less aggressive.  
The study also showed that typical singlehanded skippers are “in the zone” of sailing only a third of the  time of crewed boats in a similar race. I believe that by increasing their time “in the zone” and active  involvement in sailing the boat in order to achieve small increases in average speed, skippers can  significantly improve their final result. Records prove that even an incremental increase in average boat  speed can improve race ranking by as much as ten positions. 
iEg. “Iron War: Dave Scott, Mark Allen, & the Greatest Race Ever Run”; Matt Fitzgerald, 2011, Velopres. Marathon, The Ultimate Training Guide; Hal Higdon, 1999, St. Martin’s Press 
ii Eg. “Medical and psychological problems in the 1972 singlehanded transatlantic yacht race” Glin Bennet, The Lancet, 1973. 
“Stress and Coping in Single‐Handed Round‐The‐World Ocean Sailing”; Neil J.V. Weston, et al, University of Portsmouth, UK, Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 21‐2009 
“Voluntary Solitude: Studies of men in a singlehanded Transatlantic sailing race”, H.E. Lewis, J.M. Harris, D.H. Lewis, C. De 
Monchhaux, The Lancet 1, 1964 
iii Eg. “Taking on the World – A sailors extraordinary solo race around the globe”  Ellen MacArthur, International Marine/ Ragged Mountain Press, 2004 
“Sea of Dreams” Adam Mayers, McClelland & Stewart, 2006 
“The Strange Last Voyage of Donald Crowhurst”, Nicholas Tomalin, Ron Hall, International Marine/Ragged Mountain Press, 2003 
iv www.Gitana‐Team.com, Gate Hopping in the Deep South, 2008 
v www.ArtimusOffshoreAcademy.com 
vi http://iditarod.com 
vii www.singlehandedtranspac.com 
viii “Thoughts, Tips, Techniques & Tactics for Singlehanded Sailing”  Andrew Evans, Self e‐published 2010 
ix A correlation of 0.5 might be regarded as strong in social science situations (e.g. where the measures are based on 5‐point Likert scales) 
wiki.answers.com/Q/Would_a_0.5_correlation_be_considered_weak_modest_strong_or_very_weak 
x Personality profiles of Iditarod mushers as compared by finish group.  GO Dean, NM Dean, A Turner.  Arctic Sports Medicine / Human Performance Labgoratory, University of Alaska, Anchorage, 1989. 
xi http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/16PF_Questionnaire 
xii www.youtube.com: “Telefonica Big Wave Crashes, Volvo Ocean Race 201‐2012 
xiii Boat polars:  A graph produced for a particular boat showing the maximum possible speed for every wind angle, wind speed and sail combination assuming all other conditions are optimum. 
See http://www.pro‐charter.com/english/polar.htm 
xiv Op Cit Evans, pg 2‐10 
xv Sea of Dreams, Adam Mayers, McClelland & Stewart, 2006 
xvi It becomes challenging to measure the correlation between two data sets that are both based on reported opinions.  A 50% correlation would be considered weak in a strict mathematical comparison, but is considered stronger in social science situations.

xviii http://www.workingwellness.com/fitness‐&‐excercise/nuts‐to‐increase‐energy.php 
xix http://www.healthguidance.org/entry/16197/1/Fighting‐Lethargy.html 
xx http://www.mayoclinic.org/news2012‐rst/6907.html 
xxi http://www.cheetahpowersurge.com/ 
xxii http://www.prescriptiondrug‐info.com/drug_details.asp?title=Levocarnitine&ad=true http://health.groups.yahoo.com/group/experimentalandunconventional/message/460 
xxiii Op Cit Evans, pg 2‐1 
xxiv The Lore of Running – 4th Edition, Timothy Noakes, Human Kinetics, 2002 
xxv Op Cit Evans, Chapter 5
Chapter 9: See and Be Seen  
Navigation:  
There are numerous reference books on  navigation. I will concentrate on the only aspect  of navigation that is of particular challenge to the  singlehander – navigating in tight quarters. The  singlehanded sailor should own a hand-held,  chart plotting GPS.  
Experience has shown that it is very difficult for  a singlehander to refer to paper charts when  sailing, or even motoring, in tight channels or  shoal littered waters. It is extremely difficult to  follow a position with one finger on the chart  and the other hand on the tiller, especially during  tacks. These tasks are easy on a crewed boat, but  nearly impossible for the singlehander. If rain is  added, then the chart will be kept below deck  where the skipper can’t see it at all.  
A flush mounted, chart-plotting GPS is suitable  only if it is clearly visible from the tiller.  
A hand held, chart-plotting GPS is the best  solution. It allows the skipper to follow his  position precisely relative to any navigation  
hazards. The skipper can hold it in his hand and  closely examine the location of buoys or rocks  ahead.  
The major caveat  
is that the GPS  
should be zoomed 
in to clearly show  
all hazards. Some  
units do not show  
all hazards when  
they are zoomed 
out. I know of one  
boat that ran on a  
rock that was not  
shown in the macro view on his GPS. After  hitting the rock he selected a micro view and the  rock was clearly marked.  
With the advent of I-Phone type devices, chart  plotting GPS units have become less expensive  and more readily available.  
Maintaining a Lookout  
The International Regulations for Preventing  Collisions at Sea, Rule 5, state:  
• Every vessel shall at all times maintain a  proper look-out by sight and hearing as well  as by all available means appropriate in the  prevailing circumstances and conditions so  as to make a full appraisal of the situation  and of the risk of collision.  
Obviously, it is impossible for a singlehander to  abide by the letter of this rule. This is a  significant controversy in the sailing community:  
Troubled Waters: Bernard Hayman,  
For 19 of the 35 years that I  worked for the magazine Yachting  World, I was a member of the UK  Safety of Navigation Committee.  During those 19 years I never met  a single professional mariner be  he a shipmaster; a pilot; member  of the Nautical Institute; of  Trinity House; the RNLI; or what  is now the Marine Safety Agency  who did not consider that long  distance single handed sailing  was unlawful. Thus I am dismayed  to see a singlehanded Trans atlantic event promoted by the  RIN. Of course I am aware that  single-handed events exist but by  what right do these 'adventurers'  claim that Rule 5 the requirement  to keep a proper lookout need not  apply to them. If anyone can  offer a valid reason why Rule 5  should be rewritten, I should be  interested to hear it. Until it  is rewritten it is like any other  rule in COLREG and should be  obeyed. The RYA summed up the  situation in its comment: 'This  is the most important Rule. If it  is not observed, the rest of the  Rules might as well not exist'. 

Even if we recognize that a singlehander can not  live within the letter of the rule, is it possible to  live within the spirit:  
Reply by Michael Richey:  
My good friend Bernard Hayman's  memory on this occasion seems a  bit selective. I too served on  that Committee for many years and  was far from aware of being  isolated in holding that single handed sailing could be  compatible with the Collision  Regulations. Rule 5 ('Every  vessel shall at all times  maintain a proper look- out...')  is entirely concerned with the  risk of collision so that in the  (hypothetical) situation where no  such risk exists, it can have no  application. From this it is not  a long way to saying that where  the risk of collision is small,  some relaxation of vigilance can  be accepted. As one of the  authors (Cockcroft) of A Guide to  the Collision Regulations put it,  no one would admonish a ship's  master experiencing continuous  fog in the North Pacific Ocean  over several days for failing to  sound his whistle every two  minutes throughout the 24 hours.  In other words safety at sea is  the criterion and the Regulations  should be applied with common  sense. The views of the  
International Association of  Institutes of Navigation,  incidentally, as submitted to the  International Maritime  
Organisation on this matter and  IMO's comments on them are  printed in the Journal for  January 1979.  
Whether we live within the spirit or the letter, we  are the only ones who will suffer in any case:  
On the Lookout: Dag Pike  
Bernard Hayman in his letter  (above) is concerned about single  handers flouting the Colregs by  
not keeping a lookout all the  time. The Colregs are flouted by  virtually every vessel at sea,  particularly small craft. It may  be navigation lights not meeting  requirements, not sounding fog  signals, simply keeping out of  the way of larger ships etc. In  this radar-governed world, when  did you last hear a ship sounding  fog signals? Most people,  including single handers get away  with it and I could be cynical in  saying that the Colregs are not  there to govern our behaviour at  sea but are only so that there is  someone to blame when things do  go wrong. In the current lawyers  paradise where we need to sue  someone when an accident happens,  the Colregs perform a vital role.  In the practical world, I see no  problem with single handers  keeping the level of lookout they  feel comfortable with. After all,  they will be the ones to suffer  if a collision occurs.  
Two recent encounters between singlehanded  boat and ship come to mind:  
Jessica Watson: In the 2009 run-up to her round  the world voyage aboard the 10.4 metre sloop  “Ella’s Pink Lady,” the Australian 16 year old  laid her head down for a moment and struck the  225 metre bulk carrier Silver Yang. The mast  was destroyed and Jessica motored back to port.  
(Note: The IMO reported, June 2010: The  Australian Transport Safety Bureau said the  Chinese crew of the bulk carrier Silver Yang did  not offer any form of assistance to the skipper of  the Australian registered singlehanded yacht  Ella’s Pink Lady following a collision in  September 2009. The report said the Silver  Yang’s second mate and a seafarer had been on  duty on board the ship’s bridge but had not seen  the yacht until two and a half minutes prior to  impact. At first the crew thought the yacht to be  a bouy but by the time they realized otherwise, it  was too late to avoid a collision.) 

Louis Burton: During the 2010 Route du Rhum  on his Class 40 boat “Bureau Valleé.” At about  5:00am, while sleeping, Louis hit a Portuguese  
trawler. According to first reports, the trawler  had no one on deck and no watch standing.  Louis’s bow sprit was shattered and a breach in  the hull, but forward of his water tight bulkhead.  His pulpit, stanchions, lifelines and spinnaker  were also destroyed. Louis continued in the  race.  
In both of these encounters the singlehanded  yacht suffered extensive damage while the ship  did not report a scratch. Dag Pike’s comments  above appear to hold true: “after all, they (the  singlehander) will be the ones to suffer if a  collision occurs.” This suffering might be  physical, or it might be financial when the  lawyers get involved. But I tend to agree that we  are the ones who will suffer.  
A very good friend of mine recently started a  long voyage. I reminded her that if her only goal  was to “stay safe,” she would not be doing it in  the first place. Singlehanded sailing is a  necessarily dangerous activity. We do it because  the enjoyment we get outweighs the risks.  
Obviously a sailor must sleep, even if for 20  minutes at a time. Most singlehanders will also  spend a significant amount of time below deck  navigating, studying weather charts, cooking,  reading and even just to stay out of bad weather.  The more comfortable that the boat is below, the  longer the singlehander will stay below.  
In the open ocean, away from major shipping  channels, the chances of hitting another vessel  are extremely slim. Unfortunately, most  voyages do not cross the open ocean. As I’ve  said elsewhere, while we all dream of crossing  the great oceans, ninety-five percent of our trips  will be within a few hours or a few days of our  home port. This means that ninety-five percent  of singlehanding is done in the middle of the  most active shipping lanes, mixed in with  freighters, cruise ships, tug boats with barges on  
a quarter mile of cable and fishing boats  dragging miles of net. Although we would love  to remain purists with only the wind at our  backs, the desire to continue living means that  we must take precautions.  
Technology has lept ahead in the past decade  with a number of user friendly mechanisms  enabling singlehanders to keep a good watch  while below decks and even while sleeping.  There are skeptics to every single one of the  solutions offered below and their skepticisms are  valid. If used in combination, these solutions  will provide as close to perfect protection as is  technically possible.  
Radar offers the  
ultimate in protection,  
at the greatest cost  
and complexity. The  
least expensive radar  
systems start at  
$1,000, not including  
the many accessories  
needed to mount the unit and the screen to view  the output. The real cost is in power  
consumption of at least 33 Watts. This can be  minimized by only using the radar when below  deck and setting the system to activate once  every five minutes. Most systems offer collision  avoidance and guard zone alarms that ignore  ships passing in the distance. Here are excerpts  from a 2009 write up on radars from Chuck  Husick from www.BoatUS.com website.  
Put a radar on your boat and you  will be able to "see" through  fog, rain and darkness. In the  hands of a competent operator  radar is a remarkable aid to safe  navigation. It can confirm your  position relative to landmarks  and navigation aids such as buoys  and by detecting other waterborne  traffic make a great contribution  to collision avoidance. Once  reserved for large yachts and  ships, today's radar products are  available at prices and sizes 

suitable for use on boats as  small as 18 feet. Even the least  costly radars provide quite  complete operational  
capabilities, including on screen  display of the range and bearing  of targets. Electrical power  consumption is modest and well  within the capability of  
virtually any boat equipped with  an engine. The ultimate value of  a radar rests with the user's  ability to understand and  properly use the information on  the screen.  
Choosing radar requires  
evaluation of a number of  performance specifications. The  maximum range specification and  transmitter power rating are  often quoted as meaningful  measures of the suitability of  radar for a particular boat.  Although of interest, they are  not particularly appropriate  measures on which to base a  selection.  
Radar energy, like the energy  emitted from the VHF transceiver,  travels in a generally straight  line. Horizontally directed radar  energy is soon well above the  curved surface of the earth and  can illuminate only those objects  tall enough to protrude above the  radar horizon. Regardless of the  size of the vessel it is most  often used to scan for targets  not more than about 6 miles  distant and will frequently be  operated at ranges of less than 2  miles. Choosing a radar on the  basis of maximum range is not a  good idea.  
Radar transmitter power is  defined as Peak Pulse Power.  Although manufacturers typically  provide increasing power levels  in their longer range and most  costly sets, a modest amount of  power is usually sufficient for  
the relatively short ranges most  often used. Two kW transmitters  can provide excellent results.  For most recreational boats,  transmitter power becomes  important only in very heavy rain  conditions. Rain reflects and  absorbs radar energy. The  reflection is useful in showing  us the location and shape of rain  showers. The absorption of radar  energy can prevent a radar from  portraying targets it would  normally detect. Higher  
transmitter power can be valuable  in such cases, however there are  some tropical downpour conditions  that can absorb all of the energy  of even the most powerful ship  radar sets.  
The size of the radar antenna  plays a key role in determining  the overall performance of radar.  Marine radars use the same  antenna for both transmission and  reception. The transmitter energy  is carefully focused, much like  the light from a well designed  searchlight. However, unlike a  searchlight, where the desired  pattern of projected light is  usually circular, the energy from  the radar must illuminate a  relatively wide vertical swath to  ensure that the target area is  well covered as the boat rolls  and pitches in the sea. At the  same time, a narrow horizontal  beam is needed to allow objects  close to one another in azimuth  to be seen as separate targets  and not as a single blob. Typical  vertical beam angles are ±12.5  degrees. Horizontal beam angles,  which are largely determined by  the length of the antenna range  from about 2.4 degrees for the  smallest antennas to 0.75 degree  for antennas about 10 feet in  length. Even the smallest  antennas will provide useful  target information at the 

relatively short ranges most  often used by small craft.  
The radar antenna, transmitter  and receiver are usually packaged  as a single unit, enclosed in  either a radome or in a housing  with a rotating, bar-like antenna  mounted on its top surface. The  smallest radome housed units are  less than 12 inches in diameter  and weigh less than 10 pounds,  making them practical for  installation on even quite small  boats. The antenna should be  mounted at a height that places  it at least two feet above and  four to five feet from the head  of anyone on board and in a  position where crew members will  usually be at least five feet  from the antenna. Mounting the  antenna more than about 22 feet  above the water will not make a  worthwhile contribution to  maximum range operation and can  degrade the radar's ability to  show important close-in targets.  A radar mounting pole that places  the radar about eight feet above  the deck works well.  
The power of pleasure boat radar  transmitters ranges from about 2  kW to as much as 50 kW sets used  on large yachts (with the  
exception of the new solid state  continuous wave sets where  average power may be as low as  one-tenth of a watt). All of  these power ratings are peak  power. The transmitter delivers  its power in extremely short  pulses, usually on the order of  0.07 to 0.7 millionths of a  second long. Pulses repeat at  rates between 1000 and 3000 per  second. The average power  consumption of most radar sets is  quite low, with small boat radar  usually consuming less than 50  watts of 12 volt power. Providing  this amount of power is rarely a  problem, even on boats under sail  
with no engine or generator set  operating. Solid-state, CW radar  sets typically consume less than  20 watts, excluding the display  screen unit.  
Broadband Radar: Is the trademark of a new  technology developed by Navico and sold under  the Simrad, Lowrance and Northstar brand  names. Here is a summary of information  presented on the company websites:  
Conventional pulse radar uses a  magnetron to generate a pulsed  microwave signal that is  
transmitted from the rotating  radar antenna. This burst of  microwave energy is reflected off  any target that it hits and  returns to the radar, with the  time it takes determining the  range and bearing. This type of  radar transmission is, in  layman’s terms like shouting  loudly in one direction and then  listening to see if you hear an  echo, turning and then repeating.  
Broadband Radar uses a different  type of technology that allows  the radar to send out a  
continuous radar signal, with a  changing tone or frequency, at a  very much lower power and at the  same time listen for the change  in that signal. This is like  continuously whispering and  listening at the same time for  the echo and is made possible by  the radar using two antennas, one  to transmit and another to  receive.  
The change in the tone of the  transmitted radar signal  
determines the time taken for the  signal to reach the target and  return. This time determines the  range and the bearing.  
There is a distinct advantage in  sending out a much lower-power  signal. The distortion in a 

normal radar transmission, which  can be likened to a shout, gets  distorted at very close ranges.  This is often referred to as  “main bang” interference and  appears on the screen as a  sunburst in the centre of the  display. At very short ranges  this noise covers up any close-in  targets, making the radar  ineffective at short distances.  Many types of conventional radar  suppress this pulse and hide the  noise; but this again hides any  short-range targets, thereby  effectively blinding the radar to  nearby targets.  
With the Broadband Radar emitting  only low levels of energy the  noise and distortion is just not  there, with the result that there  is no distortion in the centre of  the screen and therefore no need  for any suppression. The benefit  of this is that close-up targets  are not lost or hidden, and the  radar is able to show approaching  targets until they are just a few  feet from the transmitter. This  short-range performance has never  before been seen in leisure  marine radar.  
Conventional radars emit a pulse,  and this pulse varies in length  depending on the range. The  length of the pulse determines  the ability of conventional radar  to distinguish between close  targets on a similar bearing, and  generally this can be down to  90ft at short ranges and up to  500ft at longer ranges. However  the Broadband Radar, using its  continuously transmitted signal,  is not only able to see targets  as close as 6ft from the dome on  the shortest scale but can also  separate targets just 30ft apart  on the scales used for general  navigation.  
Further evidence of this short range performance can be seen  from the ability of broadband  radar to go beyond the  
conventional minimum range of  1/8th to 1/32nd of a mile.  Broadband radar allows the user  to display at just 400ft, 300ft  and 200ft, with range rings of  only 100ft, for superb target  resolution and differentiation.  
According to the websites, broadband radar uses  significantly less power than traditional systems,  17 Watts in active mode and 1.6W in standby.  As well, “instant on” means that the user need  not wait 2-3 minutes of warm-up time from other  systems.  
AIS, Automatic Identification System, is the  newest  
technology and  
is becoming  
very popular  
with single 
handers. A full  
AIS system  
transmits information about a vessel’s name,  position, course and speed. It allows a skipper to  identify nearby ships, and then to hail them by  name if necessary. Systems can be configured  to detect potential collisions.  
Jeanne Socrates used her AIS extensively on two  circumnavigations. She often uses her VHF  radio to hail ships entering into her comfort zone  and has been known to yell into the radio if they  do not change course appropriately.  
The ISAF Offshore Racing Rules require that  from January 2010, an AIS transponder must be  carried for Cat 2 races and above. The  International Maritime Organization's  “International Convention for the Safety of Life  at Sea” (SOLAS) requires AIS to be fitted  aboard international voyaging ships with gross  tonnage of 300 or more tons, and all passenger  ships regardless of size. It is estimated that more 

than 40,000 ships currently carry AIS class A  equipment. In 2007, the new Class B AIS  standard was introduced which enabled a new  generation of low cost AIS transceivers. This has  triggered multiple additional national mandates  affecting hundreds of thousands of vessels.  
Class B AIS systems are most appropriate for  sailboats. They transmit at 2 W and are not  required to have an integrated display: They can  be connected to most display systems which the  received messages will be displayed in lists or  overlaid on charts. The Class B type standard  requires integrated GPS and certain LED  indicators. Class B equipment receives all types  of AIS messages.  
AIS systems are available with either Receive  Only or Transmit/Receive functions. The  Receive Only systems will receive data from  other vessels nearby. The Transmit/ Receive  systems will also transmit the sailor’s  information to other vessels every 30 seconds.  Typical power usage is about 2A during the  receive phase and up to 6A during transmission.  The receive-only systems are considerably less  expensive, in the $600 range.  
I posed a question about the usefulness of AIS  on the Singlehanded Transpac website. Here are  some of the replies:  
• I was personally far less than  impressed. I used it during my  sea-trials and qualifier, and  some of the delivery home, but  I don't even think I used it  during my Transpac at all.  There are so many vessels out  there that don't even transmit  that it's not even funny. It  gives you a false sense of  security. It seemed like when  I did use it in a place with  lots of traffic, (like SF Bay,  or just offshore near the  shipping lanes), it picked up  a majority of freight ships,  
but nowhere near all of them.  This is strictly my opinion.  
• From my experience using both,  AIS works well offshore and  alerts you to shipping traffic  beyond the range of the radar,  including localized stuff the  radar does not see due to  squalls. The radar works well  for picking up things that  aren't running AIS - other  small boats and warships, for  example. I really like running  both, the AIS continuously and  the radar on a 5 minute guard  zone mode - the radar wakes up  every 5 minutes, scans for a  minute, and if nothing is  found it goes back to sleep.  
• I loved my AIS! In fact, it  worked too well. I used a  splitter which shared the whip  on the masthead with the VHF.  This configuration gave me  targets 80 miles out! I would  spot them, want to talk, but  our CPA was three hours.  
• I loved my AIS! And it seemed  that my little 25 foot  
Folkboat was a freighter  
magnet during the  
Transpac...compared with  
others in the fleet...we saw a  ton of shipping and my little  standalone Nasa Marine AIS  unit was spot on...a false  sense of security or not--it  helped me sleep better at  night.  
• But even if just one ship in  2200 miles happens to find  your boat while you're  
sleeping, wouldn't you want to  know about it, and better yet,  wouldn't you want the ship to  "see" you? You can forget  about them seeing your radar  reflector until it's too late,  if at all. 

• AIS came in handy for one ship  that was insisting on running  us over until I called them by  name. They then said "yeah, we  see you and have you on radar.  clear astern.  
Nigel Sly from Manchester made this comment:  Most sail boats use a Class B  transceiver. Many commercial  vessels using Class A filter out  Class B signals when in harbours  to cut down on the number of  targets, but then forget to reset  the filters when back at sea.  
I’m in the habit of calling up  commercial vessels and ask if  they have my AIS signal. If not,  I ask them to check if they have  filtered out Class B, many have.  
Something to bear in mind. I am  a skipper on Maersk Anchor  handling tugs and know that this  can happen.  
Active Radar Reflector: The  
SeaMe (www.sea-me.co.uk)  
is the most popular active  
radar reflector system.  
Another brands is the  
Echomax Active XS  
(www.echomax.co.uk) (Note  
that several other brands have  
disappeared from this market:  
Ocean Sentry, Seahawk,  
Activ’Echo, Tron ARR and  
Rasmus.) These units perform two functions.  First, they “actively” reflect back a radar signal  to the passing ship that sent it. I.e. they  electronically amplify the radar signal, making a  small sailboat look much bigger to the ship.  Second, they beep to alert the singlehander that  he has been hit by a radar signal.  
Here is a brief excerpt from Capt. Phil Gallman,  Ph.D. and his website theradarreflectorsite.org.  Gallman has done extensive research on radar  
reflectors for sailors and has published a book on  the subject, available his website.  
What should I look for in an RTE  (radar target enhancer)? 
First, you want adequate RCS  (radar cross section). The IMO  recommends 7.5 m2. Much larger  than this becomes impractical for  smaller vessels. I suggest in my  book that if your sailing is  restricted to benign conditions  in protected waters a smaller RCS  may be adequate. Equally  
important to magnitude of RCS is  how RCS varies with aspect, or  orientation of the unit relative  to the radar. First, the RTE must  provide a good response at large  enough elevation angle so that  you are visible when heeled at  the maximum angle of heel you  expect to encounter (depending on  your vessel type and sailing  environment). Second, there  should be no gaps in coverage,  i.e. regions in azimuth and  elevation where the RCS is  extremely small, so that you will  never encounter the situation in  which you are invisible right up  to point of collision. Finally,  even though the RCS can vary as  the orientation changes as your  vessel rolls, yaws, and pitches  in a seaway, the variation is not  so severe that detection becomes  intermittent. Intermittent  detection is hard for a human  operator to handle and may keep  your vessel from being detected  at all.  
Active radar reflectors are very popular with  singlehanded offshore racers, mainly because of  the low power draw. Several blogs reference  their use. When being struck by radar, they use  up to 350 mA of power. When in standby, they  use as low as 35mA. I use the SeaMe unit when  sailing. My only testimony is that I’m still alive,  so I assume it works. 

IMPORTANT: Active reflectors and Broadband  radar: Note that active radar reflectors, like the  SeaMe and the CARD do not work with  broadband radar. They do not reflect any signal  back to the originating radar station. This is  important as use of broadband systems increases.  
The CARD and MER-VEILLE brands of radar  receiver have fallen out of favour of late. These  notify the skipper that he has been hit by a radar  
signal, but do not reflect back to the passing  ship. With the advancements in active reflectors  and AIS, we are seeing less of the these methods.  John Hayward on the Valiant 40 Dream Chaser  made this comment about the CARD: I have  a CARD system on Dream Chaser. In  the 2008 Transpac I ran it a lot  and it never once went off even  when large ships that the AIS  picked up were visible. In the  2010 Transpac I turned it on  several times when I picked up  traffic on the radar or the AIS  and still nothing. I have picked  up signals in the harbor with it  but I don't think it's worth the  power consumption (low as it is)  while singlehanding.  
Flashlight: Every singlehander should carry a  really big flashlight in the cockpit. A sailboat is  nearly invisible at night. A sailboat with a  spotlight shining on the sails is impossible to  miss. I find this method very effective when  sailing in congested waters, surrounded by  tugboats and fishing boats. Their radar systems  are designed to hit targets in the distance, not  two boat lengths away. A flashlight on the sails  is the best approach in a crowded channel.  
Passive Radar  
Reflector: Capt.  
Gallman has also  
done a detailed  
comparison of  
passive radar  
reflectors. The  
entire study is  
available in his  
book and excerpted on his website.  
There are many  
designs available. In  
brief, the popular  
tubular shape, such as  
the Mobri S-4,  
provides a strong  
cross section when  
vertical, but there is  
virtually no response  
when tilted past a few degrees, as on a normal  sailboat. The least expensive octahedral  reflectors, such as the Davis Echomaster  (www.davisnet.com) provided a strong response  at some ranges, particularly at large elevation  angles. Gallman recommends that these units be  rigidly mounted as the common practice of  hanging them from the spreaders with a line  allows them to flop around, producing an  intermittent response. One of the most  expensive units, the Tri-Lens, (www.tri lens.com) produced the best overall reflection in  all directions and at heal angles up to 50°.  
A Testament to the Centerboard Sonar (from  a letter I wrote to 48 North magazine.)  
I can personally speak to the incredible  technological advancement of the centerboard  sonar. My Tanzer 22, Foolish Laughter, was  equipped with this marvel of advanced  engineering and I made use of it numerous times  while sailing in Ottawa. In fact, on the very day  of my boat launch, my wife and I used the CBS  to discover that we were getting too close to the  Quebec side of the river. (I think it could sense  the maple syrup.) A simple gybe got us back  into navigable waters with nary a scratch. Three  months later, while singlehanding in the club’s  50-mile race, I used the CBS on three occasions.  
But my greatest testament is when the CBS  actually saved my life! I was returning to the  club after a nice day sail when a massive thunder  squall came up. As could be expected, my  outboard chose this moment to die and I could 


There were no tow facilities on the river, so I  dialed 911 and a half hour later the fire  department sent out their rescue RIB. But they ‐ were only equipped to rescue people, not boats,  so my beloved was left in the most treacherous  part of the river. I found a volunteer to tow my  boat, but he would not go anywhere near the  rapids. It was quite amusing to ask the fire  department to put me back on board. They had  to seek permission from several levels of  command before they agreed. Once the boat was  ashore, the local media showed up and asked if  I’d be willing to take the boat out again, just for  pictures.  
It is based on this adventure that I started a Coast  Guard Auxiliary at the club. We applied for a  grant from provincial lottery funds for a rescue  RIB, complete with twin 250hp outboards and a  launch ramp. So, it may be said that the  centerboard sonar save both my life and perhaps  many, many lives in the future. 
Chapter 10: Managing Bad Weather 
Under some circumstances there will simply be  too much weather, for too long, for the  singlehander to manage. A boat need not be  south of Cape Horn to face these conditions, they  can be found on a simple return trip from Hawaii  in the height of summer.  
Here is the log from Skip Allen’s return to  California aboard “Wildflower”, a Wylie Custom  27, just after winning the 2008 Singlehanded  Transpac. Skip’s log is an incredibly well  written adventure story, and could be enjoyed for  that reason alone. But I am presenting this as a  real opportunity for learning. The reader  should pay specific attention to:  
• Skips long sailing experience.  
• His positions on the chart, sailing  
direction and wind direction.  
• The long range forecasts that he was  working with.  
• His physical and mental condition.  • The boat’s condition. The hatch boards.  • Communication with friends and with the  coast guard, in particular via SSB.  
His words should be considered as a significant  lesson for anyone taking up this sport.  
On Saturday, 8/23, 10 days after  leaving Hanalei, we were halfway  home to Santa Cruz with 1190  miles to go. We had passed the  Pacific High, and were running in  the Westerlies at latitude 38-38  x longitude 147 -17. So far, the  passage had been going well, my  sixth return passage from Hawaii  aboard Wildflower. But an ominous  note on the thrice daily weather  fax charts was the notation  “GALE” between our position and  the Pacific Coast.  
I began to plan for this possible  gale by increasing latitude,  slowing down, and closely  monitoring projected GRIB files  out to 144 hours. It appeared  
from all forecasts that we needed  to slow down for at least 48  hours to let the gale ahead  abate. However, it is against my  instincts to slow a boat down,  and so with difficulty I reefed  the main and dropped the jib in 8  knots of wind, reducing speed to  a sedate 3.5 knots in smooth  seas.  
On Wednesday, 8/27, the morning  GRIB file showed the area of most  wind ahead was between 124 and  128 degrees, with no weather  abatement until at least Monday,  9/1 earliest. Dwight Odom on Na  Na, 450 miles ahead, had reported  gusts of 42.5 knots from the  north between latitude 127-128  and having to run off under storm  jib 80 miles. Na Na reported 20  foot seas the previous night near  37 x 124-30. I hoped that  Wildflower, by being at the  latitude 40 degrees, would allow  us to run off 180 miles to the  latitude of Santa Cruz, should  conditions worsen.  
On Friday, 8/29, at sunset near  40N x 130W, conditions began to  rapidly deteriorate. I changed to  the #4 (75% short hoist) and  storm staysail, dropping the main  completely.  
The following day, Saturday,  8/30, with Santa Cruz 365 miles  on a bearing of 095 T, we were  having to run off due south (180  T) in winds 30-35 knots. By  15:30, the sail combination  proved too much, and I dropped  the #4, flying the storm staysail  (39 sq. feet) and towing a 30”  diameter metal hooped drogue. It  was uncomfortable, windy, and  rolly that night, with the  cockpit filling about every five  minutes, and the boat being  knocked down to 70 degrees at  least half a dozen times.  Wildflower’s shallow cockpit and 

oversize drains allowed full  drainage in about 90 seconds, and  this was not a problem.  
The electric Auto Helm 1000+  tiller pilot was doing an amazing  job steering, as it was being  continuously drenched, even  submerged. The Sail-O-Mat  windvane was useless preventing  or correcting breaking wave  induced broaches and I retracted  its oar to avoid fouling the  drogue rode.  
On Sunday, 8/31, the wind was  steady 30-35, with higher gusts  and a confused wave train from  the NW, N, and NE. At 09:15 I  winched in the drogue to change  from a hi-tech spinnaker sheet to  stretchy nylon anchor line.  Unfortunately, I found the drogue  had split, and was no longer  effective. I deployed my spare  drogue, but without a metal hoop,  it would periodically collapse  astern in a breaking crest. I  think a series drogue is the best  available. But really, anything  will work as a drogue, including  a tire, milk crates, or anchor  and chain.  
(With my drogue, I was still  going 4-6 knots under bare  poles. With no drogue, I was  surfing faster, 6-10 knots.  Taking off on a breaking wave  with no one on deck is a recipe  for a roll over as the boat could  easily get sideways and broach.  I believe my use of a drogue was  justified in slowing the speed  and keeping the stern aligned  with the oncoming waves. The  amount of water coming over the  stern was manageable and not a  significant problem. There was no  water getting below, as my hatch  boards were bullet proof. Had a  breaking sea come over the side  of the boat, things would have  become more serious.)  
At noon, it looked like the gale  was lessening. I left the safety  of the cabin, and with two safety  harnesses affixed to the windward  rail, began to hand steer  eastward on a reach with the #4.  It was mogul sailing at its best,  having to radically bear away to  avoid hissing 8-12' breaking  crests on the top of 15-30 foot  seas.  
At sunset I again went below with  the Auto Helm tiller pilot  continuing to steer nicely under  #4 jib. Not long after, the wind  came on to blow from the NNW, and  the seas began to build further.  That night I stayed suited up  below with full foulies,  
headlamp, and harness, ready to  dash out the hatch and take the  tiller if the autopilot failed  and we subsequently rounded up.  In addition, I dropped the storm  staysail, as we were running too  fast at 6-9 knots. Under bare  poles DDW, the speed was better  at 5-7 knots.  
What followed ultimately played  into the following day's events.  During the long night, my third  in this particular gale, breaking  crests would poop the boat about  every five minutes, filling the  cockpit and surging against the  companionway hatch boards. Even  though I had gone to lengths for  many years to insure fire hose  watertight integrity of the  companionway hatch, I found the  power of the breaking wave crests  slamming the boat would cause  water to forcefully spray around  the edges of the hatch boards and  into the cabin.  
During the long wait for  
daylight, I had more than enough  time to ponder what might happen  if the autopilot was damaged or  was washed off its mount. I had  two spare tiller pilots. But it 

would take several minutes,  exposed in the cockpit, on my  knees, to hook up a replacement  in the cockpit, on a dark night,  when the boat was being  
periodically knocked down and the  cockpit swept.  
In addition, I pondered the fate  of the Daisy that had been lost  in this spring's Lightship Race,  presumably crushed and sunk by a  large breaking wave. I also  reminded myself I was responsible  for not only my own life, but was  also a family care giver at home.  
There was no doubt that if  Wildflower tiller pilot was lost  that we would round up and be at  the mercy of these breaking  waves, some of which I estimated  to be in the vicinity of 25-35  feet, and as big as I hadn't seen  since the '79 Fastnet Race storm  on IMP.  
The anxiety and stress of this  night, with the whine of the wind  in the rigging, the wave crests  slamming into the hatch boards,  and the 70 degree knockdowns that  would launch me across the cabin,  created serious doubts that we  could continue this for another  night, much less the 3-4 days the  conditions were expected to  continue.  
The boat was fine, and had  suffered no serious damage. My  physical health was OK, but I  could see with minimum sleep that  my decision making could be  beginning to be compromised  
At 0715 the following morning,  Monday, 9/1, I Sat phoned my long  time sailing friend, ham radio  contact, router, navigator and  weatherman, Joe Buck in Redondo  Beach. Joe and I had maintained  two per day ham radio schedule  since leaving Hanalei, and he had  
instant internet access to all  forecast weather and wave charts.  I explained the current situation  to Joe: that I'd had a difficult  night, and wasn't sure I could  safely continue. Joe's weather  info had the highest wind and  wave overhead on my current drift  southward continuing for at least  another three days, with  
continuing gale force winds and  18-22' significant wave height.  
I asked Joe for help in some  difficult decision making I had  to do. First, would he phone San  Francisco Coast Guard Search and  Rescue (SAR), and query what the  protocol was for asking for  assistance, all the while making  sure the Coast Guard understood I  was not in trouble and was not  asking for help at this time.  (Coast Guard NMC Pt. Reyes,  Kodiak, and Hono were not  answering my radio calls on their  published 4, 6, 8, and 12 mg  frequencies, both simplex and  duplex.)  
Joe called back an hour later  (08:30) on ham radio 40 meters  and said that Lt. Saxon at SAR  reported no military assets  within 200 miles or 20 hours,  that Wildflower was 200 miles  beyond helicopter range, but  that there was an inbound  container ship “Toronto” coming  in my direction at an  
undetermined distance.  
Joe helped me to understand if  the boat were lost, I would  likely be lost also. But if that  I left Wildflower in advance,  that only the boat would be lost.  I told Joe of my hesitation of  putting my life in the hands of a  possibly foreign crew on a big  commercial ship during a transfer  off Wildflower in these  
conditions, especially at night.  We agreed that a decision had to 

be arrived at soon, before 11:30,  and before Toronto passed by.  
I spent the next hour, sitting on  the cabin sole on my life raft,  debating whether to ask for  assistance in leaving my beloved  Wildflower. “Fleur” was my home,  consort, and magic carpet that I  had built 34 years ago. I cried,  pounded my fist, looked out  through the hatch numerous times  at the passing wave mountains,  remembered all the good times I  had shared with Wildflower. And  came to a decision.  
I was three days/nights in the  gale. Except for a few hours, I  was below decks, much the safest  place to be. "Sleep" was not  possible given the conditions,  though I dozed in a half awake  state for many hours. Despite  wearing earplugs, and a watch cap  pulled over my eyes, the whine of  the wind in the rigging, the  hissing and crunching of the  waves as they came aboard, the  motion of the boat, and the  worry, anticipation, and feeling  of helplessness precluded any  sound sleep: I was dressed and  ready to immediately take the  deck in the event of calamity or  loss of steering if the autopilot  was swept overboard.  
This led to exhaustion, a state I  was familiar with from my many  miles of singlehanding. I knew  that both intelligent decision  making and physical stamina was  compromised by exhaustion. It  was important to me to monitor my  mental and physical well being,  knowing I was deteriorating  because of exhaustion. I was  likely to be called upon to  perform some self rescue, and I  wanted to be in the best possible  condition to successfully pull  that off if/when the time came.  
At 11:15 I called Joe back and  told him to again call Lt. Saxon  at SAR and inform her that I was  asking for assistance. Joe called  back and informed me that Toronto  was 5-6 hours away, and that SAR  needed to hear from me directly  as to my request.  
At 12:00, like a gopher popping  out of its hole, I slid the hatch  open to get a clear Satphone  signal, and called SAR. Lt. Saxon  already knew my details and  position, and only asked “What  are you requesting?” I replied,  “I am asking for assistance to be  removed from my boat.”  
We kept the conversation short  and to the point, due to my  exposure topsides with the  Satphone. She said the MSC  Toronto would be requested to  divert, that I was NOT to trigger  the EPIRB, but that I was to take  the EPIRB with me when I left  Wildflower. Contrary to published  reports, at no time did I call  “PAN PAN,” and no com schedule  was kept with the Coast Guard,  although I did check in with Joe  every 30 minutes on ham radio.  
Lt. Saxon also said that if I  left my boat, she would be  considered “derelict” and a  hazard to navigation. I assured  her I would not leave my boat  floating or derelict.  
An hour later, at 1300,  
Wildflower AIS alarm rang. MSC  Toronto was showing 30 miles  away, and closing at 23.4 knots  from the south west. I had to do  some fast planning.  
But with no idea how the transfer  would be made (jump, swim, climb,  hoist?) I didn't know what I  could pack into my bag, bags, or  backpack. I decided on my  documents, wallet, passport, 

laptop, camera, cell phone and  sat phone, logbook, EPIRB and a  change of clothes and shoes. All  this I bagged into waterproof  bags. And in a moment of whimsy,  decided to try and offload the  two Single Handed Transpac  perpetual trophies, as they had  30 year historical value to our  Race.  
At eight miles, the captain of  the MSC Toronto rang on the VHF.  He spoke perfect English, and as  I had a visual, directed him to  alter 20 degrees to starboard to  intercept. He explained his ship  was over 1,000 feet long, that he  would lay her parallel to the  waves and make a lee at a forward  speed of Slow Ahead (6 knots).  
The captain also explained that I  would board his ship from a rope  ladder that led to the pilot's  door, on the aft starboard side.  
I asked if he could slow to a  speed between 3-4 knots, and he  willingly agreed to try.  
At five miles, a sharp eyed  lookout on MSC Toronto sighted  Wildflower ahead. But the ship's  radar did not register my boat  until 2.5 miles in these  
conditions.  
At 1415, one of the world's  biggest container ships was  bearing down on Wildflower, less  than five boat lengths (125 feet)  dead ahead, the huge bulb bow  extending 20 feet and making a  five foot breaking wave. With my  heart in my throat, I motored  down the starboard side of a  gigantic black wall, made a U  turn, and pulled alongside the  pilot's door and rope ladder.  
The crew threw a heaving line,  and in the next five minutes we  transferred three bags, including  
the perpetual trophies. Knowing I  was next, I jumped below decks,  said a final quick goodbye, and  pulled the already disconnected  hose off the engine salt water  intake thru hull.  
Back on deck, I reached for the  bottom rung of the Jacob's  Ladder, which was alternately at  head height, or 10 feet out of  reach, depending on the ship's  roll. I grabbed hold, jumped,  and did a pull up onto the  ladder, and climbed up, wearing a  15 pound backpack with my most  valuable possessions and EPIRB.  
At 1429, on Monday, 9/1, at  position 35-17 x 126-38, the MSC  Toronto resumed its voyage to  Long Beach, leaving Wildflower  alone to bang and scrape her way  down the aft quarter of the ship  and disappear under the stern. I  watched, but could barely see  through my tears.  
Four hours and 100 miles SE of  where I left Wildflower I was on  the bridge of MSC Toronto  watching the anemometer True Wind  Speed graph continuing to  register 32-35 knots. From 140  feet off the water, the swells  below still looked impressive,  and the ship was rolling enough  to send spray above the top  containers on the forward part of  the ship  
For the next 24 hours aboard MSC  Toronto (1065' LOA, too wide for  Panama) I was treated with the  utmost kindness and compassion by  Capt. Ivo Hruza and his crew of  24. We stood watch together, ate  together, told stories, viewed  family photo albums, discussed  the world situation, toured the  ship and engine room (12  
cylinder, 93,360 horsepower  diesel). By the time we came down  the Santa Barbara Channel, ahead 

of schedule, and docked at Long  Beach, I felt a part of this  happy crew of 6 nationalities. I  could not have been assisted by a  better or more professionally  manned ship.  
On Tuesday afternoon, after  clearing customs and immigration  aboard, I shook hands with each  and every crew member. And  descended the gangway alone, to  meet Joe, sister Marilee, and  begin New Beginnings.  
I will never forget Wildflower.  She took a beating in this gale.  She never let me down, and took  me to amazing places, where we  met wonderful people and made new  friends.  
In this time of loss, a most  wonderful thing is happening:  many loved ones, friends,  interested parties, and people  I've never met are closing a  circle of love around the  mourning and celebration of  Wildflower.  
Treasure Each Day,  
Skip Allen 9/3/08  
There are several excellent books available on  sailing in heavy weather. The most often quoted  book is Adlard Coles’ “Heavy Weather Sailing”,  first published in 1967.  
In 1999, Steve & Linda Dashew published their  authoritative book “Surviving the Storm, Coastal  & Offshore Tactics”. I will refer the reader to  these books for the greatest guidance.  
However singlehanding does present its own  challenges in heavy weather because there is no  one else to take watch. Every book written on  the great singlehanded races contains long  chapters about the fight against storms. They all  tell the story of spending 24, 36, 48 or more  hours at the helm. Here is an excerpt from Derek  
Lundy’s famous book “Godforsaken Sea”  published in 1998 about the BOC Challenge:  
The wryly laconic Australian  David Adams, with his fifty-foot  boat “True Blue”, was sailing  right up with the big boats and  leading class two as he sailed  his boat like a big dingy.  
“I’m absolutely stuffed,” he  reported to race headquarters.  “Been twenty-four hours at the  wheel in 40 to 60 knots. Had  four knockdowns, with the mast in  the water. Once we went down a  wave like that, on our ears.  It’s just survival out here, not  racing.”  
He later wrote: “In a huge storm  when you’re running on sheer  adrenalin, it’s enough to get  through the next half-hour alive  and bugger the race.” “People  often asked how I managed to  hand-steer for hours and even  days through these storms,” he  wrote. “Fear is a great  
motivator. I thought if I  stopped steering I would die.  Simple as that. So I kept  steering.”  
What are the key considerations for a  
singlehander in bad weather? The skipper  should know that bad weather does not just mean  a single gust of wind or one bad wave. The  books tell heroic stories about how the skipper  had to cut away the mast after the boat rolled, but  the books never talk about the wave conditions  after the first roll. We need to remember that  after the boat rolled, the weather did not  suddenly turn calm. The winds are still blowing  at 60 knots and the waves are still 30 feet high.  The immediate repairs that are done must be  done in these extreme conditions. So the  following points are vital:  
• Carry a second hatch board that is much  stronger than the day to day set. Perhaps a 

piece of ¾” plywood, tightly fitted with  gaskets would be appropriate. Keep the  hatch boards closed and locked, and the boat  well sealed at all times. Although the main  hatch might only be four square feet in actual  size, the skipper should envision a 25 foot  wave crashing over the stern, directly into the  hatchway. How much force does this wave  carry and how much force will the hatch  boards withstand? As well, it is guaranteed  that the boat will broach beyond anything the  skipper has experienced.  
If the boat fills with water, it will destroy all  of the electronic systems on board, most  likely including the autopilot computer and  the radio system. It is not difficult to  imagine what it would be like to bail out the  boat with water up to the bunks, at the same  moment that all of the lines are detached and  dragging overboard, at the same moment that  the boom has broken at the gooseneck and  the mainsail is bashing around.  
On a crewed boat, the skipper will be yelling  “Brenda, you go below and bail like hell. Kayla  and Leslie, you grab the lines and pull the mast  back on board before it smashes the hull.  Donna, try to get the radio working and notify  the coast guard of our position. Anna, you get a  bandage on Debby’s head and get her in a bunk.  I’ll do everything I can to keep our stern to the  waves.” An awful (and I use that term  deliberately) lot will happen in a severe  knockdown. A crewed boat is pushed to its  limits and will have bar room stories for years.  It is impossible to quantify the impact of the  same situation to a singlehander.  
• Make sure EVERYTHING below is well  secured. Absolutely every book about a  singlehander in a storm describes how their  supplies and tools flew around the cabin and  were broken or lost during a knockdown.  After pitch poling and breaking his mast at  Cape Horn, Derek Hatfield used a  
Leatherman pocket knife to detach all of the  
rigging and release the mast before it  
smashed a hole in the boat. This was  
because all of the tools, including a bolt  cutter, were lost somewhere inside the boat.  Before a voyage, a singlehander should  imagine what would happen if Poseidon  picked up the boat by its keel and shook it.  This is exactly what a storm can do. The  boat should be equipped with internal straps  to secure all tools and supplies in place,  whether that be on the cabin floor or in a  locker.  
Here is an excerpt from Jeanne Socrates’ log,  just after a knockdown while rounding Cape  Horn. www.SVNereida.com:  
We were well heeled, and there  were plenty of big seas...and  suddenly, near 2.30pm, while I  was fortunately leaning against a  wall in the head, all hell let  loose - and everything that could  move was re-located to the star board side of the cabin.... Water  was pouring in from under the  sliding hatch and there was chaos  everywhere.  
A photo taken by Jeanne Socrates’ of  
Nereidas’s cabin, after a knockdown  
nearing Cape Horn.  
Slowly we righted and soon after  I looked to see what damage there  was - clearly there was some - no  instruments, for a start!.. but I  could not budge the hatch to open  
it - try as might...! I had to  climb out of the aft cabin hatch  to access the cockpit - which I'd  already seen enough of to realize 

the boom was broken in half and  the canopy/dodger over the  companionway was missing, along  with its framework ..... There  was safety glass everywhere. I  soon realized why the hatch  wouldn't slide open - the halyard  bag full of heavy wet lines, was  lying on top and was soon removed  along with several lines lying  loose... Going down below, I  noticed the perspex hatch was  cracked in half vertically - a  worry if we should ever get  pooped. Next, I got the  
instruments working - a  
connection in the aft cabin had  been hit by flying/sliding  objects... In brief, I didn't  know where to start... Tried to  clear up a bit on deck - not much  I could achieve there... down  below - impossible to clear up  wet things (all pillows and  bedding were sopping wet at their  end.. still beam on to oncoming  seas... not good.)  
• How difficult will it be to cook during a  storm? A couple of thermos’s of coffee and  a thermos of hot stew cooked before the  storm, will be necessities. The skipper can  not send a designated “cook” below to whip  up a hot meal. Many snacks and bottles of  water should be kept in the cockpit, within  reach from the helm.  
• The storm sails should be readily available.  Most sailors never face a real blow. Many  will not leave the dock above 25 knots.  Their storm sails are neatly tucked in the bow  of the boat, still in the bags. I know from  experience that crawling to the bow in heavy  weather is nigh on impossible. The storm  sails should always be stored near the main  hatch, and should be lashed on deck if bad  weather is approaching.  
• What would happen in the highly likely  circumstances of the self-steering system  
being destroyed? Skip Allen reported that  his wind vane was damaged beyond repair.  He abandoned Wildflower partly because of  his fear of loosing the auto pilot as well. The  singlehander should think about this before  the voyage. What will he do if it occurs.  This is not a reason to abandon a voyage, but  it is a reason to pre-think. Is the skipper  equipped, mentally and physically, to spend  24 or 48 hours at the helm?  
• How will the singlehander sleep during the  storm? I have a “sitting hammock” in my  cockpit with my back to the main hatch. I  can sleep quite comfortably within reach of  the auto pilot, tiller and sheets. Has the boat  been setup to sleep on the floorboards, the  lowest and most stable position on the boat?  
The books about heavy weather were written for  crewed boats. But in a crewed boat, all of the  above considerations are not nearly as important.  The crew can rotate at the helm and in their  secure bunks. They have assigned tasks to cook,  bail the boat and work the lines. A singlehander  does not have these luxuries.  
  
Drogues:  
Perhaps the greatest invention to assist the  singlehander in storm conditions is the Jordan  Series Drogue. The Dashews have dedicated  more than 50 pages of their book to the topic of  drogues. It is clearly of importance during  extreme situations:  
If you cannot control your vessel  in the existing conditions  (whether due to wind and sea  state or a steering-related  mechanical problem), the use of a  sea anchor or drogue may provide  the only way to increase  
security. It is safe to say that  in moderate storm conditions,  where risks are low that a  breaking sea will cause a  capsize, slowing down is an  excellent means of getting some  rest. 


